Positioning, movement and teamwork | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Positioning, movement and teamwork
Positioning, movement and teamwork
1
.
General positioning and movement
The best position is one from which the referee can make the correct decision. All recommendations about positioning must be adjusted using specific information about the teams, the players and events in the match.
The positions recommended in the graphics are basic guidelines. The recommended positions are areas within which the referee is likely to be most effective. These areas may be larger, smaller or differently shaped depending on the exact match circumstances.
Recommendations:
The play should be between the referee and the lead AR
The lead AR should be in the referee’s field of vision so the referee should usually use a wide diagonal system
Staying towards the outside of the play makes it easier to keep play and the lead AR in the referee’s field of vision
The referee should be close enough to see play without interfering with play
‘What needs to be seen’ is not always in the vicinity of the ball. The referee should also pay attention to:
player confrontations off the ball
possible offences in the area towards which play is moving
offences occurring after the ball is played away
Positioning of assistant referees and additional assistant referees
The AR must be in line with the second-last defender or the ball if it is nearer to the goal line than the second-last defender. The AR must always face the field of play, even when running. Side-to-side movement should be used for short distances. This is especially important when judging offside as it gives the AR a better line of vision.
The AAR position is behind the goal line except where it is necessary to move onto the goal line to judge a goal/no goal situation. The AAR is not allowed to enter the field of play unless there are exceptional circumstances.
2
.
Positioning and teamwork
Consultation
When dealing with disciplinary issues, eye contact and a basic discreet hand signal from the AR to the referee may be sufficient. When direct consultation is required, the AR may advance 2–3 metres onto the field of play if necessary. When talking, the referee and AR should both face the field of play to avoid being heard by others and to observe the players and field of play.
Corner kick
The AR’s position for a corner kick is behind the corner flag in line with the goal line but the AR must not interfere with the player taking the corner kick and must check that the ball is properly placed in the corner area.
Free kick
The AR’s position for a free kick must be in line with the second-last defender to check the offside line. However, the AR must be ready to follow the ball by moving down the touchline towards the corner flag if there is a direct shot on goal.
Goal/no goal
When a goal has been scored and there is no doubt about the decision, the referee and assistant referee must make eye contact and the assistant referee must then move quickly 25–30 metres along the touchline towards the halfway line without raising the flag.
When a goal has been scored but the ball appears still to be in play, the assistant referee must first raise the flag to attract the referee’s attention then continue with the normal goal procedure of running quickly 25–30 metres along the touchline towards the halfway line.
On occasions when the whole of the ball does not cross the goal line and play continues as normal because a goal has not been scored, the referee must make eye contact with the assistant referee and if necessary give a discreet hand signal.
Goal kick
The AR must first check if the ball is inside the goal area. If the ball is not placed correctly, the AR must not move from the position and must make eye contact with the referee and raise the flag. Once the ball is placed correctly inside the goal area, the AR must take a position to check the offside line.
However, if there is an AAR, the AR should take up a position in line with the offside line and the AAR must be positioned at the intersection of the goal line and the goal area, and check if the ball is placed inside the goal area. If the ball is not placed correctly, the AAR must communicate this to the referee.
Goalkeeper releasing the ball
The AR must take a position in line with the edge of the penalty area and check that the goalkeeper does not handle the ball outside the penalty area. Once the goalkeeper has released the ball, the AR must take a position to check the offside line.
Kick-off
The ARs must be in line with the second-last defender.
Kicks from the penalty mark
Penalties (penalty shoot-out)
One AR must be positioned at the intersection of the goal line and the goal area. The other AR must be situated in the centre circle to control the players. If there are AARs, they must be positioned at each intersection of the goal line and the goal area, to the right and left of the goal respectively, except where GLT is in use when only one AAR is required. In this case, AAR2 and AR1 should monitor the players in the centre circle and AR2 and the fourth official should monitor the technical areas.
Penalty kick
The AR must be positioned at the intersection of the goal line and the penalty area.
Where the goal line can be checked for goalkeeper encroachment and goal/no goal through the use of technology (e.g. GLT, the VAR system), it is recommended that the assistant referee be positioned on the touchline, in line with the penalty mark (which is the offside line), as being on the goal line creates a risk that they may not be able to get back into a position to judge offside if the kick rebounds.
Where there are AARs, the AAR must be positioned at the intersection of the goal line and the goal area and the AR is positioned in line with the penalty mark
(which is the offside line)
.
Mass confrontation
In situations of mass confrontation, the nearest AR may enter the field of play to assist the referee. The other AR must observe and record details of the incident. The fourth official should remain in the vicinity of the technical areas.
Required distance
When a free kick is awarded very close to the AR, the AR may enter the field of play (usually at the request of the referee) to help ensure that the players are positioned 9.15 m (10 yds) from the ball. In this case, the referee must wait until the AR is back in position before restarting play.
Substitution
If there is no fourth official, the AR moves to the halfway line to assist with the substitution procedure; the referee must wait until the AR is back in position before restarting play.
If there is a fourth official, the AR does not need to move to the halfway line as the fourth official carries out the substitution procedure unless there are several substitutions at the same time in which case the AR moves to the halfway line to assist the fourth official.