Body language, communication and whistle | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Body language, communication and whistle
Body language, communication and whistle
1
.
Referees
Body language
Body language is a tool that the referee uses to:
help control the match
show authority and self-control
Body language is not an explanation of a decision.
Signals
See Law 5 for diagrams of signals
Whistle
The whistle is needed to:
start play (first and second half of normal play and extra time), after a goal
stop play:
for a free kick or penalty kick
if the match is suspended or abandoned
at the end of each half
restart play for:
free kicks when the appropriate distance is required
penalty kicks
restart play after it has been stopped for a:
caution or sending-off
injury
substitution
The whistle is NOT needed to:
stop play for a clear:
goal kick, corner kick, throw-in or goal
restart play from:
most free kicks, and a goal kick, corner kick, throw-in or dropped ball
A whistle which is used too frequently/unnecessarily will have less impact when it is needed.
If the referee wants the player(s) to wait for the whistle before restarting play (e.g. when ensuring that defending players are 9.15m (10 yd) from the ball at a free kick) the referee must clearly inform the attacking player(s) to wait for the whistle.
If the referee blows the whistle in error and play stops, play is restarted with a dropped ball.
2
.
Assistant referees
Beep signal
The beep signal system is an additional signal which is only used to gain the referee’s attention. Situations when the signal beep may be useful include:
offside
offences (outside the view of the referee)
throw in, corner kick, goal kick or goal (tight decisions)
Electronic communication system
Where an electronic communication system is used, the referee will advise the ARs as to when it may be appropriate to use the communication system with, or instead of, a physical signal.
Flag technique
The AR’s flag must always be unfurled and visible to the referee. This usually means the flag is carried in the hand closest to the referee. When making a signal, the AR stops running, faces the field of play, makes eye contact with the referee and raises the flag with a deliberate (not hasty or exaggerated) motion. The flag should be like an extension of the arm. The ARs must raise the flag using the hand that will be used for the next signal. If circumstances change and the other hand must be used, the AR should move the flag to the opposite hand below the waist. If the AR signals that the ball is out of play, the signal must be maintained until the referee acknowledges it.
If the AR signals for a sending-off offence and the signal is not seen immediately:
if play has been stopped, the restart may be changed in accordance with the Laws (free kick, penalty kick, etc.)
if play has restarted, the referee may still take disciplinary action but not penalise the offence with a free kick or penalty kick
Gestures
As a general rule, the AR should not use obvious hand signals. However, in some instances, a discreet hand signal may assist the referee. The hand signal should have a clear meaning which should have been agreed in the pre-match discussion.
Signals
See Law 6 for diagrams of signals
Corner kick/goal kick
When the ball wholly passes over the goal line, the AR raises the flag with the right hand (better line of vision) to inform the referee that the ball is out of play and then if it is:
near to the AR – indicate whether it is a goal kick or a corner kick
far from the AR – make eye contact and follow the referee’s decision
When the ball clearly passes over the goal line, the AR does not need to raise the flag to indicate that the ball has left the field of play. If the goal kick or corner kick decision is obvious, it is not necessary to give a signal, especially when the referee gives a signal.
Fouls
The AR must raise the flag when a foul or misconduct is committed in the immediate vicinity or out of the referee’s vision. In all other situations, the AR must wait and offer an opinion if it is required and then inform the referee of what was seen and heard, and which players were involved.
Before signalling for an offence, the AR must determine that:
the offence was out of the referee’s view or the referee’s view was obstructed
the referee would not have applied the advantage
When an offence occurs which requires a signal from the AR, the AR must:
raise the flag with the same hand that will also be used for the remainder of the signal – this gives the referee a clear indication as to who will be awarded the free kick
make eye contact with the referee
give the flag a slight wave back and forth (avoiding any excessive or aggressive movement)
The AR must use the ‘wait and see technique’ to allow play to continue and not raise the flag when the team against which an offence has been committed will benefit from the advantage; it is therefore very important for the AR to make eye contact with the referee.
Fouls inside the penalty area
When a foul is committed by a defender inside the penalty area out of the vision of the referee, especially if near to the AR’s position, the AR must first make eye contact with the referee to see where the referee is positioned and what action has been taken. If the referee has not taken any action, the AR must signal with the flag, use the electronic beep signal and then visibly move down the touchline towards the corner flag.
Fouls outside the penalty area
When a foul is committed by a defender outside the penalty area (near the boundary of the penalty area), the AR should make eye contact with the referee, to see the referee’s position and what action has been taken, and signal with the flag if necessary. In counter-attack situations, the AR should be able to give information such as whether or not a foul has been committed and whether a foul was committed inside or outside the penalty area, and what disciplinary action should be taken. The AR should make a clear movement along the touchline towards the halfway line to indicate when the offence took place outside the penalty area.
Goal – no goal
When it is clear that the ball has wholly passed over the goal line in the goal, the AR must make eye contact with the referee without giving any additional signal.
When a goal has been scored but it is not clear whether the ball has passed over the line, the AR must first raise the flag to attract the referee’s attention and then confirm the goal.
Offside
The first action of the AR for an offside decision is to raise the flag (using the right hand, giving the AR a better line of vision) and then, if the referee stops play, use the flag to indicate the area of the field of play in which the offence occurred. If the flag is not immediately seen by the referee, the AR must maintain the signal until it has been acknowledged or the ball is clearly in the control of the defending team.
Penalty kick
If the goalkeeper blatantly moves off the goal line before the ball is kicked and prevents a goal from being scored, the AR should indicate the encroachment according to the pre-match instructions from the referee.
Substitution
Once the AR has been informed (by the fourth official or team official) that a substitution is requested, the AR must signal this to the referee at the next stoppage.
Throw-in
When the ball wholly passes over the touchline:
near to the AR – a direct signal should be made to indicate the direction of the throw-in
far from the AR and the throw-in decision is an obvious one – the AR must make a direct signal to indicate the direction of the throw-in
far from the AR and the AR is in doubt about the direction of the throw-in – the AR must raise the flag to inform the referee that the ball is out of play, make eye contact with the referee and follow the referee’s signal
3
.
Additional assistant referees
The AARs use a radio communication system (not flags) to communicate with the referee. If the radio communication system fails to work, the AARs will use an electronic signal beep flagstick. AARs do not usually use obvious hand signals but, in some instances, a discreet hand signal may give valuable support to the referee. The hand signal should have a clear meaning and such signals should be agreed in the pre-match discussion.
The AAR, having assessed that the ball has wholly passed over the goal line within the goal, must:
immediately inform the referee via the communication system that a goal should be awarded
make a clear signal with the left arm perpendicular to the goal line pointing towards the centre of the field (flagstick in the left hand is also required). This signal is not required when the ball has very clearly passed over the goal line
The referee will make the final decision.
FAQs
Team A is awarded a direct free kick close to the opponents’ penalty area. The referee clearly informs the attacking player(s) to wait for the whistle before restarting play and approaches Team B players to ensure they respect the required distance from the ball. At the same time, Team A player takes a free kick before the referee gives a signal to do so. What is the correct decision?
The free kick must be retaken and the player who took the kick is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour.