Law 3 - The Players | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
3
The Players
Law
3
The Players
Law
3
The Players
Law
3
The Players
3
.
1
Number of players
A match is played by two teams, each with a maximum of eleven players; one must be the goalkeeper. A match may not start or continue if either team has fewer than seven players
(not including temporary dismissals or one-minute periods off the field of play in connection with the ‘Time-limited substitution protocol’ or the ‘Off-field treatment and assessment protocol’)
.
In principle, where a team is responsible for a match not continuing and/or being abandoned because it has fewer than seven players, the match will be forfeited by that team, subject to the relevant competition regulations.
If a team has fewer than seven players because one or more players has deliberately left the field of play, the referee is not obliged to stop play and the advantage may be played, but the match must not resume after the ball has gone out of play if a team does not have the minimum number of seven players.
If the competition rules state that all players and substitutes must be named before kick-off and a team starts a match with fewer than eleven players, only the players and substitutes named on the team list may take part in the match upon their arrival.
3
.
2
Number of substitutions
Official competitions
The number of substitutes, up to a maximum of five, which may be used in any match played in an official competition will be determined by FIFA, the confederation or the national football association. For men’s and women’s competitions involving the 1st teams of clubs in the top division or senior ‘A’ international teams where competition rules permit a maximum of five substitutes to be used, each team:
has a maximum of three substitution opportunities*
may additionally make substitutions at half-time
*Where both teams make a substitution at the same time, this will count as a used substitution opportunity for both teams. Multiple substitutions (and requests) by a team during the same stoppage in play count as one used substitution opportunity.
Extra time
If a team has not used the maximum number of substitutes and/or substitution opportunities, any unused substitutes and substitution opportunities may be used in extra time
Where competition rules permit teams to use one additional substitute in extra time, each team will have one additional substitution opportunity
Substitutions may also be made in the period between full-time and the start of extra time, and at half-time in extra time – these do not count as used substitution opportunities.
The competition rules must state:
how many substitutes may be named, from three to a maximum of fifteen
whether one additional substitute may be used when a match goes into extra time (whether or not the team has already used the full number of permitted substitutes)
Other matches
In senior ‘A’ international team matches, a maximum of fifteen substitutes may be named of which a maximum of
six
eight
may be used
, unless the two teams agree that more may be used, up to a maximum of eleven, in which case the referee must be informed before the match. The restrictions and procedures in place in relation to substitution opportunities in official competitions will apply
.
In all other matches, a greater number of substitutes may be used provided that:
the teams reach agreement on a maximum number
the referee is informed before the match
If the referee is not informed, or if no agreement is reached before the match, each team is allowed a maximum of six substitutes.
Return substitutions
The use of return substitutions is only permitted in youth, veterans, disability and grassroots football, subject to the agreement of the national football association, confederation or FIFA.
Additional permanent concussion substitutions
Competitions may use additional permanent concussion substitutions in accordance with the protocol listed under ‘Notes and modifications’.
3
.
3
Substitution procedure
The names of the substitutes must be given to the referee before the start of the match. Any substitute not named by this time may not take part in the match.
To replace a player with a substitute,
the ‘Time-limited substitution protocol’ under ‘Notes and modifications’ and
the following must be observed:
the referee must be informed before any substitution is made
the player being substituted:
receives the referee’s permission to leave the field of play, unless already off the field, and must leave by the nearest point on the boundary line unless the referee indicates that the player may leave directly and immediately at the halfway line or another point (e.g. for safety/security or injury)
must be off the field of play within ten seconds of the substitution board being shown or, where there is no board, of the referee’s signal for the substitution to take place, except where this is not possible due to safety/security or injury
must go immediately to the technical area or dressing room and takes no further part in the match, except where return substitutions are permitted
Where there are multiple substitutions during the same stoppage, all players being substituted must leave the field of play within ten seconds of the last substitution being indicated.
if a player who is to be substituted refuses to leave, play continues
The substitute only enters:
during a stoppage in play
at the halfway line
after the player being replaced has left
after receiving a signal from the referee
The substitution is completed when a substitute enters the field of play; from that moment, the replaced player becomes a substituted player and the substitute becomes a player and can take any restart.
All substituted players and substitutes are subject to the referee’s authority, whether they play or not.
3
.
4
Changing the goalkeeper
Any of the players may change places with the goalkeeper if:
the referee is informed before the change is made
the change is made during a stoppage in play
3
.
5
Offences and sanctions
If a named substitute starts a match instead of a named player and the referee is not informed of this change:
the referee allows the named substitute to continue playing
no disciplinary action may be taken against the named substitute
the named player can become a named substitute
the number of substitutions is not reduced
the referee reports the incident to the appropriate authorities
If a substitution is made during the half-time interval or before extra time, the procedure must be completed before the match restarts. If the referee is not informed, the named substitute may continue to play, no disciplinary action is taken and the matter is reported to the appropriate authorities.
If a player changes places with the goalkeeper without the referee’s permission, the referee:
allows play to continue
cautions both players when the ball is next out of play but not if the change occurred during half-time (including half-time of extra time) or the period between the end of the match and the start of extra time and/or penalties (penalty shoot-out)
Except where leaving the field of play within ten seconds is not possible due to safety/security or injury, if the player being substituted has not left the field of play within the required ten seconds:
the player being substituted must still leave the field of play; they are cautioned only if they excessively delay the restart beyond the ten seconds
the substitute may not yet enter the field of play
play restarts
the substitution cannot be cancelled nor a different substitute used
the substitute may enter the field of play only with the referee’s permission during the first stoppage after one minute has elapsed following the restart
For any other offences:
the players are cautioned
play is restarted with an indirect free kick, from the position of the ball when play was stopped
3
.
6
Players and substitutes sent off
A player who is sent off:
before submission of the team list cannot be named on the team list in any capacity
after being named on the team list and before kick-off may be replaced by a named substitute, who cannot be replaced; the number of substitutions the team can make is not reduced
after the kick-off cannot be replaced
A named substitute who is sent off before or after the kick-off may not be replaced.
3
.
7
Extra persons on the field of play
The coach and other officials named on the team list (with the exception of players or substitutes) are team officials. Anyone not named on the team list as a player, substitute or team official is an outside agent.
If a team official, substitute, substituted or sent-off player or outside agent enters the field of play, the referee must:
only stop play if there is interference with play
have the person removed when play stops
take appropriate disciplinary action
If play is stopped and the interference was by:
a team official, substitute, substituted or sent-off player, play restarts with a direct free kick or penalty kick
an outside agent, play restarts with a dropped ball
If a ball is going into the goal and the interference does not prevent a defending player playing the ball, the goal is awarded if the ball enters the goal (even if contact was made with the ball) unless the interference was by the attacking team.
3
.
8
Player outside the field of play
If a player who requires the referee’s permission to re-enter the field of play re-enters without the referee’s permission, the referee must:
stop play (not immediately if the player does not interfere with play or a match official or if the advantage can be applied)
caution the player for entering the field of play without permission
If the referee stops play, it must be restarted:
with a direct free kick from the position of the interference
with an indirect free kick from the position of the ball when play was stopped if there was no interference
A player who crosses a boundary line as part of a playing movement does not commit an offence.
3
.
9
Goal scored with an extra person on the field of play
If, after a goal is scored, the referee realises, before play restarts, that an extra person was on the field of play when the goal was scored, and that person interfered with play:
the referee must disallow the goal if the extra person was:
a player, substitute, substituted player, sent-off player or team official of the team that scored the goal; play is restarted with a direct free kick from the position of the extra person
an outside agent who interfered with play unless a goal results as outlined above in ‘Extra persons on the field of play’; play is restarted with a dropped ball
the referee must allow the goal if the extra person was:
a player, substitute, substituted player, sent-off player or team official of the team that conceded the goal
an outside agent who did not interfere with play
In all cases, the referee must have the extra person removed from the field of play.
If, after a goal is scored and play has restarted, the referee realises an extra person was on the field of play when the goal was scored, the goal cannot be disallowed. If the extra person is still on the field the referee must:
stop play
have the extra person removed
restart with a dropped ball or free kick as appropriate
The referee must report the incident to the appropriate authorities.
3
.
10
Team captain
Each team must have a captain on the field of play who wears an identifying armband. The team captain has no special status or privileges but has a degree of responsibility for the behaviour of the team.
Competitions may implement the ‘Only the captain’ guidelines listed under ‘Notes and modifications’.
FAQs
After an unsuccessful pass by Team A, the ball is heading out for a throw-in. While it is still on the field of play, very close to the touchline, a ball boy/girl catches the ball in an attempt to help restart the game quickly. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and instructs the ball boy/girl to leave the field of play. Play is restarted with a dropped ball for one player of Team B as they would have had the throw-in if the ball had gone out of play. The ball is dropped at the position where the ball made contact with the ball boy/girl. A free kick cannot be awarded because the interference was caused by an outside agent, not by someone named on the team lists.
A player who is to be substituted refuses to leave the field of play at the nearest point on the boundary line. What is the correct procedure?
The player being substituted must leave within ten seconds of the substitution board being shown and at the nearest point on the boundary line unless the referee indicates that the player may leave directly and immediately at the halfway line or another point (e.g. for safety/security or injury).
When the substitution board is being shown, the player being substituted is on the far side of the field of play, close to the touchline. After the referee signals for the substitution to take place, the player walks slowly towards the substitute who is at the halfway line. What is the correct procedure?
The player must leave the field of play within ten seconds of the substitution board being shown, usually at the nearest point on the boundary line. If the time limit is exceeded, the player must still leave as quickly as possible (no caution, unless they excessively delay the restart). Play restarts, but the substitute may only enter with the referee’s permission during the first stoppage after one minute has elapsed following the restart.
A player changes places and shirts with the goalkeeper while the ball is in play. The referee was not informed beforehand and stops play after noticing the change. Is this the correct decision?
No. According to Law 3, the referee should have allowed play to continue. Since the referee made an error and stopped play, it is restarted with a dropped ball (as described in Law 8). Both players are cautioned (yellow card) as the Law requires that the referee be informed before such a change is made and that it occurs during a stoppage in play.
During a match, the team captain passes the captain’s armband to a team-mate, who becomes the new captain on the field of play. Is this allowed if the change is made while the ball is in play and the referee is not informed beforehand?
Yes, the captain may be changed at any time during the game, provided that the ‘new’ captain wears the identifying armband. The Laws do not require that the referee is informed; however, when the ‘Only the captain’ guidelines are in use and the goalkeeper becomes the new captain, the referee must be told which outfield player is nominated to approach the referee instead of the goalkeeper.
The referee stops play because the goalkeeper is seriously injured and unable to continue. What is the correct procedure if their team has already used the maximum number of substitutes and/or substitution opportunities?
The team must have a goalkeeper, so one of the remaining players on the field takes over as goalkeeper and changes into a shirt that clearly distinguishes them from the other players and the match officials.
The coach of Team A plans to use a forward as the final substitute and informs a match official. While the substitute is ready and waiting at the halfway line, the referee stops play because a Team A defender is fouled and seriously injured. May the team change their decision and use a different substitute?
As long as the forward has not entered the field of play, the substitution is not completed, so the team may still change their choice of substitute to be used.
After the referee has awarded a penalty kick to Team A, the coach of Team B wants to replace the goalkeeper with a substitute who is considered better at saving penalty kicks. Is this allowed if Team B has not used its maximum number of substitutes and/or substitution opportunities?
Yes, provided that the referee is informed before the substitution is made. The replaced goalkeeper becomes a substituted player and takes no further part in the match (except where return substitutions are permitted).
A player is substituted and leaves the field of play at the nearest point. While walking along the touchline towards their technical area, the substituted player notices the ball coming towards them, with an opponent chasing it. The substituted player re-enters the field and kicks the ball to stop a promising attack. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a direct free kick because the substituted player unfairly interfered with play. The offender is sent off (red card) by being shown two yellow cards, one for re-entering the field of play without the referee’s permission and another for unsporting behaviour (stopping a promising attack).
What is the correct procedure when the team captain is being substituted?
Each team must have a captain on the field of play who can be easily identified by the referee so if the captain is substituted, another player on the field must wear a captain’s armband.
During the second half of extra time, a match official is informed that Team A wants to use a substitute, however, there is no stoppage in play before the referee signals the end of extra time. Can Team A make the substitution before penalties (penalty shoot-out) start as they made the request before the final whistle?
Except for a substitute for a goalkeeper who is unable to continue, only players who are on the field of play or temporarily off the field at the end of the match are eligible to take part in the penalties. Therefore, as the substitution did not take place before the end of extra time, it cannot be made even though it was requested before the final whistle.
A defender commits a careless foul inside their penalty area and goes down with an injury. After the referee stops play for a penalty kick, the defender leaves the field of play and is not able to continue. Their team wants to replace the injured player with a substitute before the penalty kick is taken. Is this allowed?
Yes, a substitution can be made during a stoppage in play, assuming the defending team has not used all its permitted substitutes and/or substitution opportunities (where such a restriction exists).
A player on the field changes places and shirts with the goalkeeper without informing the referee, while the ball is in play. Shortly after the change, an opponent takes a shot and the new goalkeeper pushes the ball over the crossbar with their hands, preventing it from entering the goal . What is the correct decision?
According to Law 3, if a player changes places with the goalkeeper without the referee's permission, the referee allows play to continue and cautions both players when the ball is next out of play. Therefore, play is restarted with a corner kick, and both players are shown a yellow card before the kick is taken.
The referee awards a penalty kick for a careless foul against an attacking player inside the penalty area. The attacking player is seriously injured and leaves the field of play, so their team replaces them with a substitute during a stoppage in play. Is the substitute allowed to take the penalty kick?
Yes. Once the substitute enters the field of play, they become a player and are eligible to take any restart, including the penalty kick.
During the half-time interval, an assistant coach informs the referee that they want to participate in the second half as a substitute. Is this allowed if the person was listed as a team official on the team sheet?
Law 3 requires that the names of the substitutes must be given to the referee before the start of the match. If the assistant coach was not listed as a substitute by this time, they may not play in the match.
Substitutes of both teams were a few metres on the field of play when a goal was scored. They did not interfere with play. What is the correct decision?
The Law does not expect the referee to penalise encroachment onto the field of play if it does not impact the play. The goal is allowed and the team that conceded the goal restarts play with a kick-off. There is no disciplinary sanction for the substitutes.
A player (Team A) gains possession of the ball and starts a quick counter-attack. After that, a substitute of their team enters the field of play and distracts an opposing defender’s attention from play. Team A then scores a goal when the substitute is still on the field of play. What is the correct decision?
The referee takes action against an extra person on the field of play when a goal is scored only if the person affected the play. In this case, the referee disallows the goal, cautions (yellow card) the substitute and has them removed from the field. Play restarts with a direct free kick from the position of the substitute when the referee became aware of them.
A substitute was a few metres on the field of play when the goal was scored by their team but did not interfere with play. After that, before play restarts, the referee realises that the extra person was on the field. What is the correct decision?
The Law does not expect the referee to penalise encroachment onto the field of play if it does not impact the play. The goal is allowed and the team that conceded the goal restarts play with a kick-off. There is no disciplinary sanction for the substitute.
An attacker runs with the ball towards the opponents’ goal (one-on-one situation). The goalkeeper runs out of their penalty area and then fouls the attacker when they are 20 m in front of the goal (reckless challenge for the ball). At the time of the foul, the attacker controlled the ball and was chased by two defenders who were more than 10 m away from the attacker/ball. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and awards a direct free kick to the attacking team. The goalkeeper is sent off (red card) for denying the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity. The offending team must have a new goalkeeper before play is restarted (a substitute or one of the remaining players on the field of play).
A defender (Team A) was slightly injured and left the field of play for treatment. While the defender is still behind the goal line, an attacker (Team B) kicks the ball past the goalkeeper (Team A) and the ball is going towards Team A’s goal. The defender re-enters the field without the referee’s permission, clears the ball in their penalty area and prevents it from entering the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick because the defender re-entered the field without the required permission and interfered with play inside their penalty area. Law 12 states that if this offence denies the opposing team a goal, the player is sent off (direct red card).
A defender of Team A, who was treated outside the field of play, is ready to continue and re-enters the field without the required permission. What is the correct decision if Team B starts a promising attack and the player does not interfere with play/opponents?
The referee allows play to continue. When the ball is next out of play, the player of Team A is cautioned (yellow card) for re-entering the field of play without permission and sanctioned for any further offence(s).
A substitute enters the field of play without the referee's permission and approaches an opponent. This behaviour distracts the opponent’s attention when the substitute’s team has possession. The opponent strikes the substitute in the face (ball still in play). What is the correct decision?
The substitute is cautioned (yellow card) for entering the field without permission and the opponent is sent off (red card) for violent conduct. As the substitute’s offence occurred first, play restarts with a direct free kick to the opposing team from the position of the substitute’s interference.
The referee stops play because a player (Team A) lies on the ground and is seriously injured. While the player is being assessed by a doctor, Team B is allowed to make a substitution. After it is completed and before play has restarted, the referee is informed by a match official that the injury is a result of a red card offence committed by the substituted player of Team B. What is the correct decision?
As the red card offence occurred before the substitution, the player is sent off and the substitution is cancelled. The injured player can remain on the field of play for/after treatment. If the offence occurred when the ball was in play, play restarts with a direct free kick to Team A (or a penalty kick if it occurred in Team B's penalty area).
The goalkeeper is sent off for denying the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity. Before play restarts, the team replaces a player with a substitute goalkeeper; the referee, after a VAR review, changes the red card to a yellow card for stopping a promising attack. May the team cancel the substitution in this case?
The referee may change a decision until play has restarted:
the change from a red card to a yellow card is permitted
cancelling the substitution is permitted:
within the 'spirit' of the Law and for fairness as it only occurred because of the referee's error.
within the letter of the Law as the referee technically changes the decision to allow the substitution.
A substitute was cautioned (yellow card) in the first half for delaying the restart of play by the opposing team. In the second half, the substitute replaces a team-mate and enters the field of play after receiving a signal from the referee. Ten minutes later, this (new) player handles the ball to stop a promising attack. What action does the referee take?
The referee shows a yellow card and then a red card because the same person receives two cautions in the same match – one as a substitute and one as a player. The offender is sent off and must leave the vicinity of the field of play and the technical area.
A player was cautioned (yellow card) for a reckless challenge in the first half and substituted during the half-time interval. In the second half, the same (substituted) player leaves the technical area, approaches the assistant referee and shows dissent from the offside decision. What action does the referee take?
The referee shows a yellow card and then a red card because the same person receives two cautions in the same match – one as a player and one as a substituted player. The offender is sent off and must leave the vicinity of the field of play and the technical area.
A player prepares to take a corner kick at the end of the second half. Suddenly, before the ball is in play, a spectator enters the field and kicks the ball. After that, the player loses their self-control and strikes the spectator in the face. What is the correct decision?
The referee must have the spectator removed. The player is sent off for violent conduct (red card). Play is started with the (original) corner kick.
While the ball is in play, a player re-enters the field of play without the referee’s permission, kicks the ball away and thus stops a promising attack. The ball leaves the field over the touchline. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and takes appropriate disciplinary action. The player receives a caution (yellow card) for each offence (entering without the referee’s permission and stopping a promising attack) and therefore is sent off (red card). Play is restarted with a direct free kick for the opposing team from the place where the player kicked the ball.
A team has ten players at the start of the match because one player (named on the team list before kick-off) is late. May this player take part in the match after it has started?
Yes, the player may enter the field during a stoppage in play, after receiving the referee’s permission. This person is considered a player (not a substitute) if making up the number (up to eleven). The number of substitutions the team is permitted to make is not reduced.
A substitute enters the video operation room (VOR) during a match. The referee is informed about this incident when play next stops. What is the correct procedure?
The substitute is sent off (red card), must leave the technical area and may not be replaced. The number of substitutions the team is permitted to make is not reduced.
After the ball has left the field of play, a substitute (Team A) kicks the ball away to delay the throw-in by the opponents (Team B). The substitute has already been cautioned for another offence. What is the correct decision?
The referee shows the substitute a second yellow card and a red card. The substitute is sent off, must leave the technical area and may not be replaced. The number of substitutions the team is permitted to make is not reduced. Play is restarted according to the previous decision (the throw-in for Team B).
Before the team lists have been submitted, a player spits at an opponent in the pre-match warm-up on the field of play. If it is noticed by the match officials, what is the correct procedure?
The offender cannot be named on the team list or play in the match and is reported to the appropriate authority. The number of players and substitutes is not reduced. A red card is not shown as cards may not be shown until the referee enters the field of play at the start of the match.
A substitution is made between the end of the second half and the start of extra time. The referee is not informed and realises it after extra time has started. What is the correct procedure?
A named substitute may continue to play, no disciplinary action is taken and the matter is reported to the appropriate authorities.
After the second half has started, the referee notices that during half-time a player changed places and shirts with the goalkeeper without the referee’s permission. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue. Both players are not cautioned (yellow cards are not issued). The matter is reported after the match to the appropriate authorities.
The referee notices that a named substitute is using offensive gestures towards an opposing player on the field of play during the warm-up before the kick-off. What disciplinary action does the referee take?
A named substitute who is sent off, may not take part in the match and may not be replaced by another substitute. The number of substitutions the team is permitted to make is not reduced.
A player changes places with the goalkeeper just before the end of the match without the referee's permission when the ball is in play. What is the referee's decision?
The referee allows play to continue if the player have changed shirts. Both players must be cautioned (yellow card, YC) when the ball is next out of play.
A fan enters the field of play and kicks the ball in an attempt to prevent a goal being scored. Can the goal be awarded?
Yes – if the ball was going into the goal, enters the goal and the interference does not prevent a defending player/goalkeeper playing the ball. The goal cannot be awarded if the ball goes into the fan's opponents' goal.
A referee stops play and cautions (yellow card, YC) a player who re-entered the field without permission. How is play restarted?
With a direct free kick from the position of the interference or with an indirect free kick from the position of the ball when play was stopped (if there was no interference).
Can a referee send a player off before the kick-off? For example during the warm-up on the field of play or in the tunnel pre-match?
Yes. A player who is sent off must not take part in the match. A player who was already named on the team list, may be replaced by a substitute (who may not be replaced) but this does not reduce the number of substitutions the team can make.
Can the referee award a goal if someone other than a defending player (e.g. a substitute, coach or another team official) tries to stop an opponent’s shot and touches the ball but it still goes in the goal?
If a ball is going into the goal and the interference does not prevent a defending player playing the ball, the goal is awarded if the ball enters the goal (even if contact was made with the ball). The exception: the goal cannot be allowed if the ball enters the opponents’ goal.
A named substitute starts a match instead of a named player. The referee was not informed of this change. What is the correct procedure?
The referee allows the named substitute to continue playing and:
no disciplinary sanction is taken against the named substitute
the named player can become a named substitute
the number of substitutions is not reduced
the referee reports the incident to the appropriate authorities
A team has fewer than seven players because one player has deliberately left the field of play. May the match continue?
The referee is not obliged to stop play and the advantage may be played, but the match must not resume after the ball has gone out of play if a team does not have a minimum of seven players.
A coach wants to replace a player with a substitute during a stoppage in play. The player refuses to leave the field. What is the referee’s decision?
If a player refuses to be substituted, play continues.
What does the term "outside agent" refer to in the Laws of the Game?
Any person who is not a match official or on the team list (players, substitutes and team officials) - it may also be any animal, object, structure etc.
A substitution is made during the half-time interval. The referee is not informed and realises it after the second half has started. What is the procedure?
A named substitute may continue to play, no disciplinary action is taken and the matter is reported to the appropriate authorities.
In which categories of competitions are return substitutions permitted?
In youth, veterans, disability and grassroots football, subject to the agreement of the national football association, confederation or FIFA.
May a player change places with the goalkeeper after the penalty kick has been awarded against their team?
Yes, provided that the referee is informed before the change is made and that the change is made during the stoppage in play before the penalty kick is taken.
With the ball in play, a coach enters the field of play to interfere with an opposing player. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee will stop play (unless advantage is played), send off (red card, RC) the coach and restart play with a direct free kick from the position of the interference – if this is in the penalty area of the coach’s team a penalty kick is awarded.
A dog enters the field of play during the match and prevents a goal being scored by stopping the ball on the goal line. The dog’s interference does not prevent any defending player from playing the ball. What is the referee’s decision?
The dog is an ‘outside agent’ so the referee stops play and restarts with a dropped ball for the defending team goalkeeper in their penalty area.