Law 13 - Free Kicks | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
13
Free Kicks
Law
13
Free Kicks
Law
13
Free Kicks
Law
13
Free Kicks
13
.
1
Types of free kick
Direct and indirect free kicks are awarded to the opposing team of a player, substitute, substituted or sent-off player, or team official guilty of an offence.
Indirect free kick signal
The referee indicates an indirect free kick by raising the arm above the head; this signal is maintained until the kick has been taken and the ball touches another player, goes out of play or it is clear that a goal cannot be scored directly.
An indirect free kick must be retaken if the referee fails to signal that the kick is indirect and the ball is kicked directly into the goal.
Ball enters the goal
if a direct free kick is kicked directly into the opponents’ goal, a goal is awarded
if an indirect free kick is kicked directly into the opponents’ goal, a goal kick is awarded
if a direct or indirect free kick is kicked directly into the team’s own goal, a corner kick is awarded
13
.
2
Procedure
All free kicks are taken from the place where the offence occurred, except:
indirect free kicks to the attacking team for an offence inside the opponents’ goal area are taken from the nearest point on the goal area line which runs parallel to the goal line
free kicks to the defending team in their goal area may be taken from anywhere in that area
free kicks for offences involving a player entering, re-entering or leaving the field of play without permission are taken from the position of the ball when play was stopped. However, if a player commits an offence off the field of play, play is restarted with a free kick taken on the boundary line nearest to where the offence occurred; for direct free kick offences, a penalty kick is awarded if this is within the offender’s penalty area
where the Law designates another position (see Laws 3, 11, 12)
The ball:
must be stationary and the kicker must not touch the ball again until it has touched another player
is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves
Until the ball is in play, all opponents must remain:
at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the ball, unless they are on their own goal line between the goalposts
outside the penalty area for free kicks inside the opponents’ penalty area
Where three or more defending team players form a ‘wall’, all attacking team players must remain at least 1 m (1 yd) from the ‘wall’ until the ball is in play.
A free kick can be taken by lifting the ball with a foot or both feet simultaneously.
Feinting to take a free kick to confuse opponents is permitted as part of football.
If a player, while correctly taking a free kick, deliberately kicks the ball at an opponent in order to play the ball again but not in a careless or reckless manner or using excessive force, the referee allows play to continue.
13
.
3
Offences and sanctions
If, when a free kick is taken, an opponent is closer to the ball than the required distance, the kick is retaken unless the advantage can be applied; but if a player takes a free kick quickly and an opponent who is less than 9.15 m (10 yds) from the ball intercepts it, the referee allows play to continue. However, an opponent who deliberately prevents a free kick being taken quickly must be cautioned for delaying the restart of play.
If, when a free kick is taken, an attacking team player is less than 1 m (1 yd) from a ‘wall’ formed by three or more defending team players, an indirect free kick is awarded.
If, when a free kick is taken by the defending team inside its penalty area, any opponents are inside the penalty area because they did not have time to leave, the referee allows play to continue. If an opponent who is in the penalty area when the free kick is taken, or enters the penalty area before the ball is in play, touches or challenges for the ball before it is in play, the free kick is retaken.
If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again before it has touched another player, an indirect free kick is awarded; if the kicker commits a handball offence:
a direct free kick is awarded
a penalty kick is awarded if the offence occurred inside the kicker’s penalty area unless the kicker was the goalkeeper in which case an indirect free kick is awarded
FAQs
A player takes a free kick while the ball is moving and attempts to make a short pass to a team-mate. However, the pass is weak and inaccurate, so the opposing team intercepts the ball and gains possession. What should the referee decide?
Although the ball must be stationary when a free kick is taken, the referee may apply the advantage if allowing play to continue is of greater benefit to the opposing team than ordering a retake.
The referee awards a free kick to Team A for a holding offence in the middle of the field (no disciplinary sanction or medical treatment is required). Immediately after play is stopped, a Team A player takes a quick free kick while the ball is moving. What is the correct decision?
Since the ball was not stationary when a free kick was taken, it is retaken by Team A, unless the referee plays the advantage (this is only possible if the ball is kicked, clearly moves, and the opposing team benefits from allowing play to continue).
A player recklessly tackles an opponent while challenging for the ball, which is on the touchline. What is the referee’s decision if contact with the opponent’s leg occurs outside the field of play, but the ball has not left the field?
The player is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour. The reckless tackle was committed off the field of play when the ball was in play, therefore, play is restarted with a direct free kick on the touchline nearest to where the offence occurred.
A defender receives the ball from a team-mate, ‘flicks’ it up with their foot and heads it to their goalkeeper, who bends down to pick it up inside their penalty area. However, as no opponent approaches, the goalkeeper dribbles the ball with their feet and then kicks it upfield. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and cautions (yellow card) the defender, as the player responsible for initiating a deliberate trick to circumvent Law 12, which clearly states that this unsporting behaviour is penalised whether or not the goalkeeper touches the ball with the hands. Play is restarted with an indirect free kick to the opposing team where the trick occurred.
A defender slips while taking a free kick and only kicks the ball a few metres. As an opponent starts running towards the ball, the defender kicks it a second time towards their goalkeeper. This kick is too strong and enters their own goal without being touched by either the opponent or the goalkeeper. What is the correct restart decision?
A player cannot score against their own team from a restart i.e. the Laws require that the ball must touch another player (from either team) for the goal to be awarded. If the player taking the free kick touches the ball again before it has touched another player, and the ball enters their own goal, the referee awards an indirect free kick to the opposing team from the position where the second touch occurred.
If the referee forgets to signal that a free kick is indirect, the player taking the kick shoots and the goalkeeper tries to save the shot and touches the ball before it enters the goal, what decision should the referee make?
Law 13 requires the referee to signal when a free kick is indirect. If the referee failed to do so, their mistake probably caused the goalkeeper to attempt to save the shot. For reasons of fairness, the referee should apply the ‘spirit’ of the Law, disallow the goal and have the free kick retaken, as a team should not suffer because of a referee’s mistake.
According to Law 13 – Free Kicks, where three or more defending team players form a ‘wall’, all attacking team players must remain at least 1 m (1 yd) from the ‘wall’ until the ball is in play. Is this distance also required if two defenders stand next to each other in the ‘wall’, with another defender on the ground behind?
The player on the ground can be considered part of the ‘wall’ within the 'spirit' of the Law as all three defenders are positioned closely together to form a barrier against the free kick.
A defender takes a free kick inside their own half and kicks the ball towards their goalkeeper. The pass is weak and inaccurate, and an opposing attacker runs towards the ball. The defender chases the ball and kicks it before the attacker, preventing them from gaining possession. What is the correct decision?
The defender who took the free kick cannot touch the ball a second time until it has touched another player. The referee awards an indirect free kick to the attacker’s team and takes the appropriate disciplinary sanction:
caution (yellow card) – if the second touch stopped a promising attack
sending-off (red card) – if it denied an obvious goal-scoring opportunity
The referee awards an indirect free kick to Team A inside Team B’s penalty area. What is the correct position for the defending team’s players until the ball is in play?
The defending team’s players must remain at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the ball, unless they are on their own goal line between the goalposts (if an indirect free kick is taken from a point closer than 9.15 m (10 yds) from the goal line).
While a player from Team A is preparing to take a free kick, an opponent from Team B moves forward and is less than 9.15 m from the ball when the kick is taken. The pass from the kicker is not intercepted by the opponent, and the ball reaches another Team A player who gains control of it without being under pressure from any Team B players. What is the correct decision?
The referee applies advantage if allowing play to continue benefits Team A more than retaking the free kick. Depending on the exact circumstances, the referee may decide to caution (yellow card) or warn the offending Team B player when the ball is next out of play.
A defender takes a free kick and kicks the ball towards their own goalkeeper. The pass is too strong and inaccurate, so the goalkeeper touches the ball, but cannot control it. Subsequently, the ball enters the team’s goal. What is the correct decision?
If the free kick had been kicked directly into the team’s own goal, play would have restarted with a corner kick to the opponents. However, as the ball was touched by the goalkeeper before crossing the goal line, the referee awards the goal.
After the referee has awarded a direct free kick against Team A, a Team B player moves the ball a few metres away from where the foul occurred to be closer to the opponents’ goal. Before the player takes the free kick, an opponent (Team A) runs towards the ball and kicks it away. What is the correct decision?
The referee instructs Team B to take the free kick from the correct position. The opponent (Team A) is cautioned (yellow card) for delaying the restart of play.
The referee awards a free kick to Team A for a holding offence in the middle of the field (no disciplinary sanction or medical treatment is required). Immediately after play is stopped, a Team A player takes a quick free kick while the ball is moving. What is the correct decision?
The free kick cannot be taken when the ball is not stationary, so the referee stops play and Team A retakes the kick.
A defender illegally tackles an attacker and denies the opposing team an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). What is the correct decision if the defender’s leg makes contact with the opponent’s body outside the penalty area, but the attacker’s foot is already inside this area?
The attacking team is awarded a direct free kick where the defender’s leg made contact with the opponent. DOGSO offences outside the penalty area are punished with a sending-off (red card), even if the foul was an attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball.
A player takes a free kick close to the opponents’ penalty area. The ball hits the crossbar, rebounds into the field of play and goes back to the kicker without touching any other players. After that, the kicker passes the ball to a team-mate who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to the defending team because the kicker played the ball a second time before it had touched another player.
Team A is awarded a direct free kick close to the opponents’ penalty area. The referee clearly informs the attacking player(s) to wait for the whistle before restarting play and approaches Team B players to ensure they respect the required distance from the ball. At the same time, Team A player takes a free kick before the referee gives a signal to do so. What is the correct decision?
The free kick must be retaken and the player who took the kick is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour.
Under pressure from an attacking team player, a defender deliberately kicks the ball to the goalkeeper. However, because the ball will go into the goal, the goalkeeper handles the ball inside the goal area to prevent a goal. What is the referee’s decision?
An indirect free kick is awarded to the attacking team which is taken from the nearest point on the goal area line which runs parallel to the goal line. In this case, there is no disciplinary sanction because the goalkeeper cannot be sent off (red card) for a handball offence in their own penalty area.
A player takes a free kick and the referee forgets to raise the arm above the head to signal that the kick is indirect. After that, the ball is kicked directly into the opponents’ goal (without touching another player). What is the correct decision?
The indirect free kick is retaken by the same team.
A defender takes a direct free kick and passes the ball to a goalkeeper who slips on the grass and does not touch the ball. After that, an attacker of the opposing team runs towards the ball so the same defender kicks the ball out for a corner kick and denies the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the attacking team because the defender cannot touch the ball a second time after a restart until it has touched another player. The free kick will be taken:
from the place where the offence occurred – if the second touch occurred outside the goal area
from the nearest point on the goal area line which runs parallel to the goal line – if the second touch occurred in the goal area
The defender is sent off (red card) for a DOGSO offence.
The referee has awarded a free kick to Team A. While the kicker feints to kick the ball, an opposing player moves closer than the required distance (9.15 m) and interferes with the kick before the ball is in play. What is the correct decision?
Feinting to take a free kick to confuse opponents is permitted. The opposing player is cautioned (yellow card) for failing to respect the required distance.
When the ball is in play, a player leaves the field of play without the referee's permission and attempts to strike an opposing coach. The referee stops play. What is the correct decision?
The player is sent off (red card) for violent conduct. Play is restarted with a direct free kick to the opposing team from the point on the boundary line nearest to where the offence occurred.
At a free kick the goalkeeper 'flicks' the ball up and a team-mate heads/chests the ball back for the goalkeeper to catch in their own penalty area. What is the referee’s decision?
The 'initiator' of this attempt to circumvent the Law is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour. Play is restarted with an indirect free kick to the opposing team as outlined in Law 13.2 (depending on where the ball was ‘flicked’ up).
After a direct free kick is taken and the ball is already in play, one of the attacking players (Team A) encroaches within 1 m from a ‘wall’ formed by four defending players (Team B). A goal is scored by Team A directly from the free kick. What is the correct decision?
Where three or more defending team players form a ‘wall’, all attacking team players must be at least 1 m from the ‘wall’ until the ball is in play. It is not an offence if an attacking player encroaches after the ball has been kicked and clearly moved, so the goal is awarded.
A defender takes a direct free kick and passes the ball back to a goalkeeper. The goalkeeper fails to kick the ball and does not touch it. After that, the ball enters the goal. What is the correct decision?
If a free kick is kicked directly into the team's own goal, the referee awards a corner kick to the opposing team.
When a free kick is taken, a defending player lies or kneels on the ground behind a wall formed by other defending team players. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue as no offence is committed.
An attacker (Team A) kicks the ball when it is between Team B goalkeeper’s hand and the ground (inside Team B’s goal area). What is the correct decision?
The goalkeeper is considered to be in control of the ball so cannot be challenged. The referee awards a direct free kick to Team B to be taken from anywhere in the goal area. Any disciplinary sanction will depend whether the challenge was careless (no sanction/warning), reckless (caution/yellow card) or using excessive force (sending-off/red card).
A player takes an indirect free kick. The ball enters the opponents’ goal without touching any other player. What is the correct decision?
A goal kick is awarded to the defending team because a goal cannot be scored directly from an indirect free kick i.e. without the ball touching another player (of either team).
The referee stops play and cautions a player who committed a reckless challenge. The offending player shows dissent from this decision. What action does the referee take?
The player receives a second caution (yellow card) and is sent off (red card). Play restarts with a direct free kick to the opposing team from the place where the reckless challenge was committed (dissent occurred when the ball was not in play and does not change the restart).
A player takes a free kick. After the ball is in play, the player kicks the ball again before it has touched another player. What is the correct decision?
An indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team.
A free kick is taken quickly by a defending team player inside their penalty area. An opponent who deliberately remained in the penalty area intercepts the ball once it is in play and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is disallowed and the free kick is retaken. Players who deliberately remain inside or enter the penalty area before the kick is taken should not gain an unfair advantage, even if the kick is taken quickly.
While a free kick is taken by Team A, an opponent (Team B) is closer to the ball than the required distance. A player (Team A) deliberately kicks the ball at an opponent to play the ball again. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue - it is not an offence unless the ball was kicked in a careless or reckless manner or using excessive force, in which event a direct free kick is awarded to Team B and Team A player sanctioned accordingly.
The referee awards a free kick but an opponent prevents the free kick being taken quickly. What is the referee’s decision?
The offending player must be cautioned (yellow card) for delaying the restart of play.
A player took a free kick quickly, which was intercepted by an opponent who was less than 9.15 m (the required distance) away. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee will allow play to continue as the player took a risk (to gain an advantage) by taking the free kick when an opponent was still within 9.15 m.
An attacking player is fouled outside the penalty area but falls into the penalty area. How is play restarted?
Offences are penalised at the point on the field where the offence occurred so a foul outside the penalty area is a free kick offence even if the player falls into the penalty area.
A free kick is awarded for an offside offence. A player kicks the free kick directly into the opponents’ goal. What is the referee’s decision?
If an offside offence occurs, the referee awards an indirect free kick. A goal cannot be scored directly from an indirect free kick; a goal kick is awarded to the opponents.
When a direct free kick is taken, one of the attacking players (Team A) is less than 1 m from a ‘wall’ formed by four defending players (Team B). A goal is scored by Team A directly from the free kick. What is the referee’s decision?
Where three or more defending team players form a ‘wall’, all attacking team players must not encroach within 1 m from the ‘wall’ until the ball is in play. The referee will award an indirect free kick for the defending Team B from the place where the offender (Team A) was standing.
A defending team player takes a free kick and kicks the ball accidentally into his/her team’s own goal. How is play restarted?
If a direct or indirect free kick is kicked directly into the team’s own goal, a corner kick is awarded to the opposing team.