Law 5 - The Referee | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
5
The Referee
Law
5
The Referee
Law
5
The Referee
Law
5
The Referee
5
.
1
The authority of the referee
Each match is controlled by a referee who has full authority to enforce the Laws of the Game in connection with the match.
5
.
2
Decisions of the referee
Decisions will be made to the best of the referee’s ability according to the Laws of the Game and the ‘spirit of the game’ and will be based on the opinion of the referee, who has the discretion to take appropriate action within the framework of the Laws of the Game.
Competitions may use technology to assist the referee in making or changing decisions in relation to:
the VAR protocol
ball in/out of play, including through the use of goal line technology (GLT)
offside, including through the use of semi-automated offside technology (SAOT)
The decisions of the referee regarding facts connected with play, including whether or not a goal is scored and the result of the match, are final. The decisions of the referee, and all other match officials, must always be respected.
The referee may not change a restart decision on realising that it is incorrect or on the advice of another match official if play has restarted or the referee has signalled the end of the first or second half (including extra time) and left the field of play or abandoned the match. However, if at the end of the half, the referee leaves the field of play to go to the referee review area (RRA) or to instruct the players to return to the field of play, this does not prevent a decision being changed for an incident which occurred before the end of the half.
Except as outlined in Law
12.4
and the VAR protocol, a disciplinary sanction may only be issued after play has restarted if another match official had identified and attempted to communicate the offence to the referee before play restarted; the restart associated with the sanction does not apply.
If a referee is incapacitated, play may continue under the supervision of the other match officials until the ball is next out of play.
5
.
3
Powers and duties
The referee:
enforces the Laws of the Game
controls the match in cooperation with the other match officials
acts as timekeeper, keeps a record of the match and provides the appropriate authorities with a match report, including information on disciplinary action and any other incidents that occurred before, during or after the match
supervises and/or indicates the restart of play
Advantage
allows play to continue when an offence occurs
, or a restart is incorrectly taken and the ball is in play,
and the
non-offending
opposing
team will benefit from the advantage, and penalises the offence
/orders a retake
if the anticipated advantage does not ensue at that time or within a few seconds
Disciplinary action
punishes the more serious offence, in terms of sanction, restart, physical severity and tactical impact, when more than one offence occurs at the same time
takes disciplinary action against players guilty of cautionable and sending-off offences
has the authority to take disciplinary action from entering the field of play for the pre-match inspection until leaving the field of play after the match ends (including penalties (penalty shoot-out)). If, before entering the field of play at the start of the match, a player commits a sending-off offence, the referee has the authority to prevent the player taking part in the match (see Law 3.6); the referee will report any other misconduct
has the power to show yellow or red cards and, where competition rules permit, temporarily dismiss a player, from entering the field of play at the start of the match until after the match has ended, including during the half-time interval, extra time and penalties (penalty shoot-out)
takes action against team officials who fail to act in a responsible manner and warns or shows a yellow card for a caution or a red card for a sending-off from the field of play and its immediate surrounds, including the technical area; if the offender cannot be identified, the senior coach present in the technical area will receive the sanction. A medical team official who commits a sending-off offence may remain if the team has no other medical person available, and act if a player needs medical attention
acts on the advice of other match officials regarding incidents that the referee has not seen
Injuries
allows play to continue until the ball is out of play if a player is only slightly injured
stops play
only
if a player is seriously injured and ensures that the player is removed from the field of play. An injured player may not be treated on the field of play
and, where an injury results in play being stopped or the restart of play being delayed, the injured player must leave the field of play
and may only re-enter
one minute
after play has restarted;
*
if the ball is in play, re-entry must be from the touchline but if the ball is out of play, it may be from any boundary line.
Exceptions
The only exceptions
to the requirement to leave the field of play
for and/or after treatment
are
only
when:
a goalkeeper is injured
a goalkeeper and an outfield player have collided and need attention
players from the same team have collided and need attention
a severe injury has occurred
a player is injured as the result of a physical offence for which the opponent is cautioned or sent off (e.g. reckless or serious foul challenge)
, if the assessment/treatment is completed quickly
a penalty kick has been awarded and the injured player will be the kicker
ensures that any player bleeding leaves the field of play. The player may only re-enter on receiving a signal from the referee, who must be satisfied that the bleeding has stopped and there is no blood on the equipment
if the referee has authorised the doctors and/or stretcher bearers to enter the field of play, the player must leave on a stretcher or on foot. A player who does not comply must be cautioned for unsporting behaviour
if the referee has decided to caution or send off a player who is injured and has to leave the field of play for treatment, the card must be shown before the player leaves
if play has not been stopped for another reason, or if an injury suffered by a player is not the result of an offence, play is restarted with a dropped ball
*See ‘Off-field treatment and assessment protocol’ under ‘Notes and modifications’.
Outside interference
stops, suspends or abandons the match for any offences or because of outside interference e.g. if:
the floodlights are inadequate
an object thrown by a spectator hits a match official, a player or team official, the referee may allow the match to continue, or stop, suspend or abandon it depending on the severity of the incident
a spectator blows a whistle which interferes with play - play is stopped and restarted with a dropped ball
an extra ball, other object or animal enters the field of play during the match, the referee must:
stop play (and restart with a dropped ball) only if it interferes with play - unless the ball is going into the goal and the interference does not prevent a defending player playing the ball, the goal is awarded if the ball enters the goal (even if contact was made with the ball) unless the interference was by the attacking team
allow play to continue if it does not interfere with play and have it removed at the earliest possible opportunity
allows no unauthorised persons to enter the field of play
5
.
4
Video assistant referee (VAR)
The use of video assistant referees (VARs) is only permitted where the match/competition organiser has fulfilled all
the implementation
requirements as set out in
the VAR Handbook
, and has received written permission from FIFA.
The referee may be assisted by a video assistant referee (VAR) only in the event of a ‘clear and obvious error’ or ‘serious missed incident’ in relation to:
goal/no goal
penalty/no penalty
direct
red card (
not
including a clearly incorrect
second caution)
mistaken identity when the referee cautions or sends off the wrong player
of the offending team
clearly incorrectly awarded corner kick if the decision can be changed immediately and without delaying the restart (competition option)
The assistance from the video assistant referee (VAR) will relate to using replay(s) of the incident. The referee will make the final decision which may be based solely on the information from the VAR and/or the referee reviewing the replay footage directly (‘on-field review’).
Except for a ‘serious missed incident’, the referee (and where relevant other ‘on-field’ match officials) must always make a decision (including a decision not to penalise a potential offence); this decision does not change unless it is a ‘clear and obvious error’.
Reviews after play has restarted
If play has stopped and restarted, the referee may only undertake a ‘review’, and take the appropriate disciplinary sanction, for mistaken identity or for a potential sending-off offence relating to violent conduct, spitting, biting or extremely offensive, insulting and/or abusive action(s).
5
.
5
Referee's equipment
Compulsory equipment
Referees must have the following equipment:
Whistle(s)
Watch(es)
Red and yellow cards
Notebook (or other means of keeping a record of the match)
Other equipment
Referees may be permitted to use:
Equipment for communicating with other match officials – buzzer/beep flags, headsets etc.
EPTS or other fitness monitoring equipment
Body cameras if the competition organiser supplies the cameras, has control of the footage and complies with the relevant guidelines. The cameras may include microphones, which cannot be used to broadcast communication with the video assistant referee (VAR). Camera footage and sound may be used by the appropriate authorities for disciplinary matters.
Referees and other ‘on-field’ match officials are prohibited from
wearing jewellery or
using
any other electronic equipment, including cameras
, except the body cameras outlined above
.
Accessories may be worn as long as they are not dangerous.
5
.
6
Referee signals
Refer to graphics for approved referee signals.
5
.
7
Liability of match officials
A referee or other match official is not held liable for:
any kind of injury suffered by a player, official or spectator
any damage to property of any kind
any other loss suffered by any individual, club, company, association or other body, which is due or which may be due to any decision taken under the terms of the Laws of the Game or in respect of the normal procedures required to hold, play and control a match
Such decisions may include a decision:
that the condition of the field of play or its surrounds or that the weather conditions are such as to allow or not to allow a match to take place
to abandon a match for whatever reason
as to the suitability of the field equipment and ball used during a match
to stop or not to stop a match due to spectator interference or any problem in spectator areas
to stop or not to stop play to allow an injured player to be removed from the field of play for treatment
to require an injured player to be removed from the field of play for treatment
to allow or not to allow a player to wear certain clothing or equipment
where the referee has the authority, to allow or not to allow any persons (including team or stadium officials, security officers, photographers or other media representatives) to be present in the vicinity of the field of play
any other decision taken in accordance with the Laws of the Game or in conformity with their duties under the terms of FIFA, confederation, national football association or competition rules or regulations under which the match is played
FAQs
While taking a throw-in, a player holds the ball over the head and then drops it onto the ground inside the field of play. What is the correct decision?
Law 15 clearly states that the thrower must ‘throw’ the ball. If the ball is ‘dropped’ and not thrown, the throw-in is not taken correctly. In this case, the opposing team will take the throw-in, unless they gain possession of the ball and the referee applies the advantage when allowing play to continue is of greater benefit to them than awarding a throw-in.
A player lifts one foot off the ground while taking a throw-in and the ball enters the field of play. What is the correct decision?
The throw-in is retaken by the opposing team because the Laws of the Game require the thrower to have part of both feet on/touching the ground (on or behind the touchline) at the moment of delivering the ball. However, if the opponents gain possession of the ball, the referee may apply the advantage if this is of greater benefit than awarding them the throw-in.
What is the referee’s decision if a throw-in is not taken correctly?
If the ball did not directly enter the field of play, the throw-in is retaken by the same team. If the ball entered the field of play, the opposing team takes the throw-in, unless the referee applies the advantage (it is only possible if the ball came into play and the opposing team will benefit from allowing play to continue, e.g. they gained possession of the ball).
An attacking player (Team A) kicks the ball which then accidentally touches a hand/arm of their team-mate (Team A). The referee stops play, but wrongly decides that the handball offence was committed by a defending player (Team B), who is punished with a yellow card (YC) and a direct free kick to Team A. May the video assistant referee (VAR) inform the referee that the player from the non-offending team was cautioned?
A YC which is not a second YC can be reviewed to identify the player who committed the handball offence that was penalised. In this case, the YC for the defender is cancelled and play is restarted with a direct free kick to Team B.
An attacker challenges a defender, who falls to the ground in the middle of the field and pretends to have been fouled, despite there being no contact. The referee stops play, awards a free kick for the defender’s team and shows a yellow card (YC) to the attacker, which is their second YC in the match and results in a red card (RC). May the video assistant referee (VAR) inform the referee about a ‘clear and obvious error’ so that the incident is reviewed?
Yes, the VAR can assist the referee in relation to a clearly incorrect second YC. After the referee reviews the replay footage, the second YC and the subsequent RC for the attacker are cancelled. The defender is shown a YC for simulation and play is restarted with an indirect free kick to the attacker’s team.
A player who has already received a yellow card commits a reckless tackle, which would be their second caution in the match; however, the offence is not seen by the referee on the field. May the video assistant referee (VAR) inform the referee about a serious missed incident and recommend a ‘review’?
No. The VAR can only intervene when the referee shows a clearly incorrect second yellow card which results in a red card, not when a potential second yellow card offence has been missed.
While taking a goal kick, a goalkeeper slips on the grass. After the ball is in play, they kick the ball a second time (before it has touched any other player) to deny an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). The ball goes to an opposing player who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee plays the advantage following a DOGSO offence and, as a result, the attacking team scores, so the goal is awarded, and the goalkeeper is not cautioned or sent off.
While taking a goal kick, the goalkeeper kicks the ball only a few metres. As an opponent then enters the penalty area and runs towards the ball, the goalkeeper kicks the ball again (before it has touched any other player). This second touch prevents the opponent from gaining control of the ball, denying them an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO); however, the ball rebounds off the opponent’s leg and goes into the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee plays the advantage following a DOGSO offence and, as a result, the attacking team scores, so the goal is awarded, and the goalkeeper is not cautioned or sent off.
A defender competes with an attacker for the ball and commits a careless tackle outside the penalty area which denies the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). The referee allows play to continue as the ball goes to another attacking player who gains possession of the ball, takes a shot and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee plays the advantage following a DOGSO offence and, as a result, the attacking team scores, so the goal is awarded, and the defender who committed the offence is not cautioned or sent off.
A defending player (Team A) denies an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO) by pulling an opponent’s shirt (Team B) outside the penalty area. The referee allows play to continue as the ball goes to another Team B player who gains the possession, takes a shot on goal and misses the opportunity (the ball goes over the crossbar). What is the referee’s decision?
The goal kick is awarded to Team A. As the referee played advantage for a DOGSO offence and no other sending-off (red card) offence was committed (neither serious foul play nor violent conduct), and a goal was not scored, the offending player (Team A) is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour.
When the ball is in play in the middle of the field, the referee notices that a player lies on the ground and stops play because the player is seriously injured. The player leaves the field for treatment. How is play restarted?
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for one player of the team that would have retained or gained possession if this can be determined by the referee; otherwise, it is dropped for one player of the team that last touched it. The ball is dropped at its position when play was stopped.
The referee stops play and awards a free kick for a careless tackle. As the offence was committed close to the touchline, the fouled player, who is injured, voluntarily leaves the field of play during a stoppage to avoid delaying the restart of play by their team. What is the correct procedure?
The injured player may only re-enter (with the referee’s permission) after the free kick has been taken, but does not have to remain off the field for one minute.
When the ball is in play in the middle of the field, the referee notices a player laying on the ground and stops play, assuming that the player is seriously injured. The referee asks the player if they require on-field medical attention and the player requests it. What is the correct procedure in this case?
Depending on the injury, the player is assessed and/or treated on the field of play. After that, the player must leave the field and may only return after play has restarted with a dropped ball (as outlined in Law 8), one minute (running clock) has elapsed and the referee has signalled for the player to return.
An attacking team player falls to the ground without being fouled while their team-mate has possession of the ball near their opponents’ penalty area. What is the referee’s decision if the player is seriously injured and there is no goal-scoring opportunity for the attacking team?
The referee stops play to ensure that the player receives medical attention. Depending on the injury, the player may be assessed and/or treated on the field of play but must then leave the field and remain off it until play has restarted and one minute has elapsed. As the injury is not the result of an offence, the referee restarts play with a dropped ball to a player of the attacking team at the position of the ball when play was stopped.
The referee stops play and awards a penalty kick because a defender recklessly tackles an attacker inside the defender’s penalty area. The attacker is able to continue playing and remains on the field; however, the defender is injured and requires medical attention. What is the correct procedure?
The referee cautions the defender (yellow card) for the reckless challenge and requires them to leave the field of play for treatment. The defender cannot be on the field when the penalty kick is taken and may only return (with the referee’s permission) one minute after play has restarted.
A defender commits a careless tackle against an attacker which stops a promising attack (SPA) in the centre circle. The attacker goes down and appears to be seriously injured. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play, awards a direct free kick and cautions (yellow card) the defender for the SPA offence. As the injury results from a physical offence for which the opponent is cautioned, the attacker may stay on the field of play after the assessment/treatment.
A player (Team A) commits a brutal tackle while challenging an opponent (Team B) for the ball. As a result, both players are injured and need medical attention. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and awards a direct free kick or penalty kick to Team B. The Team A player is sent off (serious foul play) and has to leave the field of play for treatment (the red card must be shown before the player leaves). The Team B player may stay on the field after the assessment/treatment.
A player (Team A) committed a reckless challenge against an opponent (Team B) outside the penalty area. As a result, both players are injured and need attention. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and awards a direct free kick to Team B. The Team A player is cautioned (yellow card), must leave the field of play and remain off it until play has restarted and one minute has elapsed. The Team B player may stay on the field after the assessment/treatment.
The referee stops play, awards a free kick for a foul against a Team A player, and delays the restart of play to allow the injured player to be assessed by the medical staff on the field of play. Is the player required to leave the field if they are able to continue after the initial assessment/treatment?
The player can remain on the field of play and take the free kick if the injury results from a physical offence for which the opponent is cautioned (yellow card) or sent off (red card). Otherwise, the player must leave the field of play and may only re-enter one minute after play has restarted.
A player takes a free kick while the ball is moving and attempts to make a short pass to a team-mate. However, the pass is weak and inaccurate, so the opposing team intercepts the ball and gains possession. What should the referee decide?
Although the ball must be stationary when a free kick is taken, the referee may apply the advantage if allowing play to continue is of greater benefit to the opposing team than ordering a retake.
A player takes a throw-in from the wrong position and throws the ball onto the field of play. What should the referee do if the opposing team gains possession of the ball?
Although the ball is not thrown from the point where it left the field of play, as the ball entered the field of play, the referee may apply the advantage if allowing play to continue is of greater benefit to the opposing team than awarding a throw-in.
At the moment of delivering the ball at a throw-in, a player has one foot outside the field of play and the other foot fully inside the field (not touching the touchline). The ball then enters the field and is intercepted by an opponent. What is the correct decision?
According to Law 15, the thrower must have part of each foot on the touchline or on the ground outside the touchline. Although the throw-in was not taken correctly, as the ball came into play, the referee may apply advantage and allow play to continue if this benefits the opposing team.
A defender recklessly challenges an attacker for the ball inside the defender’s penalty area and this foul denies the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). What is the sanction if the referee awards a penalty kick?
The defender committed two offences listed in Law 12 under ‘Cautions for unsporting behaviour’:
a direct free kick offence committed in a reckless manner
a DOGSO offence which was a challenge for the ball and resulted in a penalty kick
When more than one offence occurs at the same time, the referee punishes the more serious offence. As both offences are punishable with a yellow card, a yellow card is shown for the reckless challenge, as its physical severity is more serious than the ‘tactical’ DOGSO offence.
A defender recklessly tackles an attacker outside the penalty area and this foul denies the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). What is the correct decision if the advantage is not applied?
The referee stops play and awards a direct free kick. When two offences are committed at the same time, the more serious offence is punished, so the defender receives a red card for the DOGSO offence rather than a yellow card for the reckless foul.
A player from Team A is carelessly tackled by an opponent from Team B in the middle of the field. The referee allows play to continue because the fouled player quickly gets up and regains possession of the ball; however, another Team B player intervenes and immediately kicks the ball out of play for a throw-in on Team A’s half. What is the decision?
The referee waited a few seconds to allow a possible advantage to develop. As Team A did not benefit from the decision to continue play, the referee returns to the original offence and awards a direct free kick to Team A from the position where the tackle occurred.
After the referee awards a free kick against Team A, the captain approaches the referee and shows dissent while the referee is explaining the decision. What action can be taken against the captain?
Referees’ decisions must always be respected and a team captain can be punished for dissent, just like any other player. Therefore, if a captain fails to interact with the referee in a respectful manner, a caution (yellow card) is issued.
After the first half has ended, the referee sees a player striking an opponent in the tunnel on the way to the dressing rooms. What is the correct procedure?
The referee has the power to show cards during the half-time interval, even if the offence occurs off the field of play. The player is shown a red card for violent conduct, takes no further part in the match, and cannot be replaced. Since the card is shown off the field, the referee must inform both teams and, where appropriate, ensure an announcement is made to the spectators before the second half begins.
After the final whistle has been blown, a player argues with the referee on the field of play and clearly shows dissent verbally, without attempting to touch the referee. What action can be taken against the player?
The referee has the authority to take disciplinary action until leaving the field of play. Even though the match has ended, an appropriate card may still be shown if it helps manage the situation or calm the player. Verbal dissent is punished with a caution (yellow card), unless the words are offensive, insulting, or abusive (red card). Regardless of whether the card is shown or not, the referee must report the offence to the appropriate authorities.
A player is cautioned (shown a yellow card, YC) for unsporting behaviour between the toss of a coin and the kick-off. What is the correct procedure if the same player receives another YC during a match?
The referee has the power to show red and yellow cards from the moment they enter the field at the start of the match. Therefore, a caution (YC) issued between the coin toss and the kick-off is carried into the match, and if they receive a second YC during the match the player is sent off (shown a red card).
A defender and an attacker jump for a header in the middle of the field and collide in the air while competing legally for the ball (neither of them touches it). After that, both players fall to the ground and appear to be seriously injured so the referee stops play to allow the players to be assessed/treated accordingly. How will play be restarted if the ball was outside the penalty area when play was stopped?
Play will be restarted with a dropped ball (as outlined in Law 8).
While the ball is in play, a spectator throws a bottle onto the field towards a player who is running with the ball, close to the touchline. The player stops running to avoid the bottle. What is the referee’s decision?
The object interfered with play so the referee stops a match and has the bottle removed from the field. If the match is not suspended or abandoned for safety reasons, play restarts with a dropped ball (as outlined in Law 8).
After the first half has ended, a player argues with the referee, verbally protesting against a referee’s decision made earlier in the match. This occurs while both the player and referee are outside the field of play, heading towards the tunnel. What is the correct procedure in this situation?
According to Law 5, the referee has the power to show cards during the half-time interval. Therefore, the player must be cautioned (yellow card) for dissent. If the card is shown off the field of play, the referee must inform both teams and, where appropriate, ensure that an announcement is made to spectators before the second half begins.
A defender recklessly tackles an attacker. The referee applies advantage because the attacker quickly gets up and continues running with the ball. The defender then chases the attacker, pulls their shirt and thus stops a promising attack (SPA) outside the penalty area. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and awards a direct free kick from the position of the shirt-pulling offence. Since two separate cautionable offences have occurred, even though close together, the defender must receive two cautions: one for the reckless challenge and another for SPA. The defender is therefore shown two yellow cards, followed by a red card, and is sent off.
A defender from Team A recklessly tackles an opponent near the touchline and thus stops a promising attack by Team B. The referee stops play because there is no advantage for Team B. What is the correct restart of play and disciplinary sanction?
The referee awards a direct free kick to Team B and cautions the defender for the reckless challenge. When two offences are committed at the same time, only one yellow card is shown, as the referee punishes the more serious offence. In this case, the physical, reckless foul is more serious than the tactical offence of stopping a promising attack.
A player commits a second cautionable offence in the same match, so the referee shows a second yellow card and a red card to the offender. The player does not agree with the decision and uses offensive language towards the referee. What is the correct procedure?
The player is sent off from the field of play and its surroundings. A second red card is not shown but the subsequent (verbal) offence must be included in the post-match report. Any additional sanction/suspension resulting from the offensive language will be decided by the appropriate disciplinary body.
A player is serving a temporary dismissal (sin bin) at the end of the second half. The match is drawn and will be followed by penalties (penalty shoot-out). May the referee permit this player to take part?
Yes, the Laws of the Game protocol allows a temporarily dismissed player to participate in the penalties (penalty shoot-out) even if the full amount of the temporary dismissal period has not elapsed.
After the first half has ended, a player argues with an opponent and strikes them in the face on the field of play. The referee is informed by another match official about the incident as they are leaving the field, heading to the tunnel. What is the correct decision?
Law 5 clearly states that the referee has the power to show cards during the half-time interval. The offending player must be shown a red card for violent conduct, be prevented from taking any further part in the match, and cannot be replaced by a substitute. If the red card is not shown on the field of play, the player’s team and the opposing team should be informed and, where appropriate, an announcement made for the spectators before the start of the second half.
A player is carelessly fouled in the middle of the field. Their team retains possession of the ball and continues a promising attack, so the referee signals advantage but the attacking team players stop because someone in the crowd, not the referee or anyone on the team lists, has blown a whistle. What is the correct decision?
As the anticipated advantage did not materialise because of outside interference, the referee awards the (original) direct free kick from the position of the foul.
A defender of Team A, who was treated outside the field of play, is ready to continue and re-enters the field without the required permission. What is the correct decision if Team B starts a promising attack and the player does not interfere with play/opponents?
The referee allows play to continue. When the ball is next out of play, the player of Team A is cautioned (yellow card) for re-entering the field of play without permission and sanctioned for any further offence(s).
A defender trips an attacker in a reckless manner outside the penalty area. What is the correct decision if this foul denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO)?
The referee stops play and awards a direct free kick to the attacking team. In terms of disciplinary sanction, the referee punishes the more serious offence, so it is a red card for the DOGSO offence, not a yellow card for the reckless foul.
An attacker passes the ball to a team-mate in an offside position and, immediately after that, is fouled by a defender (reckless tackle outside the penalty area). The team-mate waits for the ball, receives it a few seconds after the foul and then runs towards the opponents’ goal (one-on-one situation). What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play, cautions (yellow card) the defender and awards a direct free kick to the attacking team as the foul has occurred before the offside offence. The referee could not allow play to continue because the attacking team could not benefit from the advantage in this situation as their team-mate was offside.
At a penalty kick, the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line before the ball is kicked. The goalkeeper makes a save but the ball rebounds from the goalkeeper to an attacking team player who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee plays the advantage for the goalkeeper’s offence and awards the goal. As the penalty kick is not retaken, there is no disciplinary sanction (warning or caution) for the goalkeeper.
The referee stops play because a player (Team A) lies on the ground and is seriously injured. While the player is being assessed by a doctor, Team B is allowed to make a substitution. After it is completed and before play has restarted, the referee is informed by a match official that the injury is a result of a red card offence committed by the substituted player of Team B. What is the correct decision?
As the red card offence occurred before the substitution, the player is sent off and the substitution is cancelled. The injured player can remain on the field of play for/after treatment. If the offence occurred when the ball was in play, play restarts with a direct free kick to Team A (or a penalty kick if it occurred in Team B's penalty area).
A defender commits a foul challenge within their own penalty area which denies an attacker an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO) and endangers the safety of the opponent. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick and sends off the defender. When two offences occur at the same time, the more serious offence must be punished. Therefore, it is a red card for serious foul play (not a yellow card for the DOGSO offence that was a challenge for the ball inside the penalty area).
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), a coach acts in a provocative manner towards opposing team officials. What is the correct decision?
The referee may take disciplinary action against team officials who fail to act in a responsible manner during kicks. The coach will be cautioned (yellow card) or sent off (red card) depending on the exact circumstances.
The goalkeeper is sent off for denying the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity. Before play restarts, the team replaces a player with a substitute goalkeeper; the referee, after a VAR review, changes the red card to a yellow card for stopping a promising attack. May the team cancel the substitution in this case?
The referee may change a decision until play has restarted:
the change from a red card to a yellow card is permitted
cancelling the substitution is permitted:
within the 'spirit' of the Law and for fairness as it only occurred because of the referee's error.
within the letter of the Law as the referee technically changes the decision to allow the substitution.
Before the team lists have been submitted, a player spits at an opponent in the pre-match warm-up on the field of play. If it is noticed by the match officials, what is the correct procedure?
The offender cannot be named on the team list or play in the match and is reported to the appropriate authority. The number of players and substitutes is not reduced. A red card is not shown as cards may not be shown until the referee enters the field of play at the start of the match.
A player takes a free kick and the referee forgets to raise the arm above the head to signal that the kick is indirect. After that, the ball is kicked directly into the opponents’ goal (without touching another player). What is the correct decision?
The indirect free kick is retaken by the same team.
It rains heavily during a match and the playing conditions get worse throughout the first half. Is it allowed to shorten the half-time interval to complete the game earlier?
Yes, provided that the referee and both teams agree. The referee may also decide to stop, suspend or abandon the match if the condition of the field, its surrounds or the weather conditions do not allow the game to be continued.
A player is injured as the result of a reckless tackle for which the opponent is cautioned (yellow card). After the initial assessment/treatment on the field of play, the medical staff determines that the player should not continue playing and the referee authorises the stretcher bearers to enter. What is the correct decision if the player refuses to leave the field?
The injured player is cautioned (yellow card) and must leave the field on the stretcher or on foot.
Team A player takes the kick-off and kicks the ball directly into the opponent’s goal. What is the correct decision if a Team B player entered the opponents’ half of the field before the ball was in play?
The referee plays advantage for the offence by Team B and awards the goal.
A defender (Team A) makes a clearance under pressure from an attacker (Team B) and tries to kick the ball away without looking where other opponents are standing. Unfortunately, the ball hits another attacker (Team B) in the face who is three metres away, inside the defender’s penalty area. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue (accidental incident, no offence) unless the attacker requires medical attention. In this situation, the referee stops play and allows a doctor to enter the field and examine the player. Play will be restarted with a dropped ball for the defending team goalkeeper in their penalty area.
While the ball is in play, a defender (Team A) and an attacker (Team B) fight with each other in Team A’s penalty area. What is the referee’s decision?
Both players must be sent off (red card) for violent conduct. If the referee decides that:
Team A player committed the offence first – penalty kick for Team B
Team B player committed the offence first – direct free kick for Team A
the two players committed the offences at the same time – penalty kick for Team B because Team A player committed the more serious offence in terms of the restart
When the ball is out of play, the referee notices that a player is bleeding. What is the correct decision?
The referee ensures that the player leaves the field. The player may only re-enter on receiving a signal from the referee, who must be satisfied that the bleeding has stopped and there is no blood on the player's equipment.
May the referee undertake the VAR ‘review’ if – after a match-changing incident – play has stopped and been restarted?
No, it is not permitted except for:
a case of mistaken identity or
for a potential sending-off offence relating to violent conduct, spitting, biting or extremely offensive, insulting and/or abusive action(s).
The referee notices that a player is committing a cautionable (yellow card) offence on the field of play during the warm-up before the kick-off. What is the correct procedure?
The offending player cannot be cautioned, or a yellow card shown, as the offence has occurred before the referee has entered the field of play at the start of the match. The incident is reported to the appropriate disciplinary authorities.
A defending player strikes an attacking player inside the penalty area when the ball is in play. An assistant referee indicates the offence but the referee does not see the indication. Play continues and the ball leaves the field. What decisions can the referee take if play has already restarted with a throw-in?
The referee may not change a restart decision and may not award a penalty kick. A red card for violent conduct may be issued because the assistant referee had identified and attempted to communicate the offence to the referee before play restarted.
Two players from the same team have collided and need attention. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play. Both players may be treated on the field of play and do not have to leave it.
A player makes a challenge which might endanger the safety of the opponent. The video assistant referee recommends an on-field review for a potential sending-off (red card, RC) offence because this incident was not seen by the referee. May the referee, after undertaking the review, decide to caution (yellow card, YC) the offender?
The final decision(s) must be based on what has been seen – therefore although the review was initiated for a red card offence if the referee's opinion, after watching the replays, is that the offence was a caution (YC) and not a sending-off (RC), then the referee must issue a YC.
The referee has decided to caution a player who is injured and has to leave the field of play for treatment. When does the referee issue the sanction?
The yellow card must be shown before the player leaves but if the player is seriously injured the referee should show some empathy when showing the card.
Two players from different teams commit an offence at the same time: a player from Team A challenges for the ball in a reckless manner; a player from Team B strikes an opponent with excessive force. What is the referee’s decision?
Both players must receive the appropriate disciplinary sanction:
caution (yellow card) for a reckless challenge
sending-off (red card) for violent conduct
Play is restarted with a direct free kick for Team A because the player from Team B committed the more serious offence.
A player (Team A) stopped a promising attacking by a reckless challenge. The opponents (Team B) retain possession of the ball and the referee plays the advantage. What disciplinary action does the referee take against the offender?
The player (Team A) must be cautioned (yellow card, YC) when play next stops. The Laws state that the referee punishes the more serious offence when more than one offence occurs at the same time. Thus, if a promising attack is stopped (SPA) by a reckless challenge then the YC is for the reckless challenge and not SPA.
The referee has awarded a penalty kick, however, the video assistant referee (VAR) recommends a ‘review’ because the foul was committed outside the penalty area. What is the appropriate procedure?
A ‘VAR-only review’ is usually appropriate for factual decisions e.g. location of an offence (inside/outside the penalty area), offside, ball out of play etc.
Only one ‘TV signal’ is needed so the VAR tells the referee what the TV replays show and the referee then makes the 'TV signal' immediately before giving the final decision.
A defending team player has made their body bigger and touched the ball with their arm inside their own penalty area. The referee allows play to continue. The video assistant referee (VAR) communicates the incident to the referee. What is the correct procedure?
The referee stops play when the ball is next in a neutral zone/situation and shows the ‘TV signal’. As this is a subjective decision, an ‘on-field review’ (OFR) is appropriate so the referee goes to the referee review area to view replay footage before making a final decision.
A goalkeeper and an outfield player have collided and need attention. Do they have to leave the field of play for treatment?
No. The referee will allow both players to be treated and then remain on the field.
What is the referee’s decision if more than one offence occurs at the same time?
The referee punishes the more serious offence, in terms of sanction, restart, physical severity and tactical impact.
Is the referee permitted to give ‘no decision’ and then use the VAR to make a decision?
No. The VAR is only used after the referee has made a first decision (including allowing play to continue), or if a serious incident is missed/not seen by the match officials.
Can the referee make a decision based only on the information received from the video assistant referee (VAR)?
Yes. Once the review is initiated, the referee has the option to review the replay footage directly. A VAR-only review is usually only appropriate for factual decisions e.g. position of an offence or player (offside), point of contact (handball/foul), location (inside or outside the penalty area). However, with both a VAR-only review and an on-field review, it is the referee who makes the final decision, not the VAR.
A player is shown a red card (RC) and then commits another sending-off (RC) offence before leaving the field of play. Should the referee show the RC again? How long will the player be suspended?
Both offences are reported by the referee but the second RC is not shown. The length of the suspension is defined by competition/disciplinary rules, not by the Laws of the Game. The decision is made by the appropriate disciplinary committee.
A goalkeeper committed an offence while a penalty kick was taken and then saved a kick. Is the use of VAR allowed in this situation?
Yes. The referee may receive assistance from the VAR in case of offence by the goalkeeper and/or kicker at the taking of a penalty kick.
An attacking team player is fouled after he/she has passed the ball to a team-mate who was in an offside position when the pass was made. What is the referee’s decision?
Whichever offence occurs first is penalised so the foul is only penalised if it occurs before the player in an offside position commits an offside offence (e.g. touched the ball).
If both offences occur at the same time the foul is penalised as it is more serious i.e. offside is punished with an indirect free kick whereas the foul is punished with a direct free kick.
An injured player may be treated on the field of play when a penalty kick has been awarded and this player will be the kicker. Does this Law apply also if the player was not injured by the offence which resulted in the award of the penalty kick?
Yes, the referee should allow quick treatment on the field of play before the penalty kick is taken as it would be unfair if the team’s kicker has to leave the field and cannot take the penalty kick.
A player who has left the field of play for treatment signals that he/she is ready to re-enter the field and wants to take the throw-in. Is the player allowed to take the throw-in before first entering the field of play?
The player can take the throw-in if:
play has restarted between the player leaving the field for treatment and the player’s request
and
before taking the throw-in, the player enters the field of play – this need only involves touching the touchline with their foot.
A player has committed a cautionable (yellow card, YC)/sending-off (red card, RC) offence when the ball is in play. An assistant referee indicates/communicates the offence but the referee does not see the indication/hear the communication until after play has restarted. May the referee still show a YC/RC?
Yes, a disciplinary sanction may (only) be issued after play has restarted if another match official had identified and attempted to communicate the offence to the referee before play restarted subject also to the provisions of Law 12.3 and the VAR protocol.
One of the team officials deliberately throws a bottle onto the field of play. What is the referee’s decision if the offender cannot be identified?
Deliberately throwing or kicking an object onto the field of play is punished with a sending-off (red card, RC). The senior coach (usually the main coach) present in the technical area will receive the sanction – as the person responsible for other team officials.
A player commits a cautionable (yellow card, YC) offence but the referee allows play to continue. After that, the same player commits a second YC offence. What is the referee's decision?
The player will be shown a yellow card, then the second yellow card and – as a result – the red card and sent off
unless
the first offence was 'interfering with or stopping a promising attack' in which case this offence does not receive a yellow card (as the advantage effectively restored the promising attack).