Law 16 - The Goal Kick | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
16
The Goal Kick
Law
16
The Goal Kick
Law
16
The Goal Kick
Law
16
The Goal Kick
Introduction
A goal kick is awarded when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, on the ground or in the air, having last touched a player of the attacking team, and a goal is not scored (see also Laws 8, 10, 13 and 15).
A goal may be scored directly from a goal kick, but only against the opposing team; if the ball directly enters the kicker’s goal, a corner kick is awarded to the opponents.
16
.
1
Procedure
The ball must be stationary and is kicked from any point within the goal area by a player of the defending team
The ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves
Opponents must be outside the penalty area until the ball is in play
16
.
2
Offences and sanctions
If a player is unfairly delaying the taking of a goal kick for their team, the referee will whistle and signal the start of a five-second countdown. The referee will visually count down the five seconds with a raised hand, and if the goal kick has not been taken by the end of the five seconds, a corner kick is awarded to the opposing team. The offending player is cautioned only if they excessively delay the restart after the corner kick has been awarded to the opposing team.*
If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again before it has touched another player, an indirect free kick is awarded; if the kicker commits a handball offence:
a direct free kick is awarded
a penalty kick is awarded if the offence occurred inside the kicker’s penalty area, unless the kicker was the goalkeeper, in which case an indirect free kick is awarded
If, when a goal kick is taken, any opponents are inside the penalty area because they did not have time to leave, the referee allows play to continue. If an opponent who is in the penalty area when the goal kick is taken, or enters the penalty area before the ball is in play, touches or challenges for the ball before it is in play, the goal kick is retaken.
If a player enters the penalty area before the ball is in play and fouls or is fouled by an opponent, the goal kick is retaken and the offender may be cautioned or sent off, depending on the offence.
For any other offence, the kick is retaken.
*See ‘Throw-in and goal-kick countdown protocol’ under ‘Notes and modifications’.
FAQs
The goalkeeper delays a goal kick at the end of the match: ignores the ball passed by a ball girl, goes for another ball, and slowly walks to the goal area. The goalkeeper has already been cautioned (yellow card) in the first half. What action does the referee take?
As the goalkeeper is deliberately delaying the restart of play, the referee does not have to wait for the goalkeeper to have possession of the ball to blow the whistle and signal the start of a five-second countdown. If the goal kick has not been taken by the end of the five seconds, the referee awards a corner kick to the opposing team. The goalkeeper is cautioned (yellow card) and then sent off (red card) only if they excessively delay the restart after the corner kick has been awarded.
A few minutes before the end of the second half, Team A, which is one goal behind, shoots but the ball goes out for a goal kick. While Team A players are quickly leaving the penalty area, the Team B goalkeeper puts the ball on the ground, then picks the ball up, moves a few metres, and places the ball on the other side of the goal area. What action does the referee take?
The referee blows the whistle, signals with their hand/arm for the goal kick to be taken and counts down the five seconds with a raised hand. If the ball is not in play by the end of the five seconds, the referee awards a corner kick to the opposing team. The goalkeeper is not cautioned, unless they then excessively delay the taking of the corner kick by the opposing team.
While taking a goal kick, a goalkeeper slips on the grass. After the ball is in play, they kick the ball a second time (before it has touched any other player) to deny an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). The ball goes to an opposing player who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee plays the advantage following a DOGSO offence and, as a result, the attacking team scores, so the goal is awarded, and the goalkeeper is not cautioned or sent off.
While taking a goal kick, the goalkeeper kicks the ball only a few metres. As an opponent then enters the penalty area and runs towards the ball, the goalkeeper kicks the ball again (before it has touched any other player). This second touch prevents the opponent from gaining control of the ball, denying them an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO); however, the ball rebounds off the opponent’s leg and goes into the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee plays the advantage following a DOGSO offence and, as a result, the attacking team scores, so the goal is awarded, and the goalkeeper is not cautioned or sent off.
An attacker (Team A) and a defender (Team B) are chasing the ball, which was last touched by the attacking team and is about to leave the field of play over the goal line. After the ball has wholly passed over the goal line, the defender recklessly pushes the attacker inside Team B’s penalty area. What is the correct decision?
The defender is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour. A penalty kick cannot be awarded because the reckless pushing offence occurred when the ball was not in play. Therefore, play is restarted with a goal kick to Team B.
A defender commits a careless tackle on an opponent outside the penalty area that stops a promising attack. The referee applies advantage, as the ball goes to another attacker who runs into the penalty area and shoots. The ball goes over the crossbar without touching any other player. What is the correct decision?
Play is restarted with a goal kick. There is no disciplinary sanction for the defender because, by playing the advantage, the promising attack was restored, and the careless tackle itself does not warrant a caution.
An attacker does not control a pass from a team-mate, accidentally falls to the ground and the ball goes out for a goal kick. While the goalkeeper prepares to take the goal kick, the attacker gets up and runs away as quickly as possible. The goalkeeper kicks the ball when the attacker is still inside the penalty area with their back to the opponents’ goal. After that, the attacker intercepts the ball and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is awarded. There is no offence as the attacker did not have enough time to leave the penalty area and was allowed to touch the ball once it was in play (kicked by the goalkeeper and clearly moved).
An attacker is inside the opponents’ penalty area when a goal kick is taken. The attacker does not make an effort to leave the penalty area and watches the goalkeeper and the ball. Once it is kicked, the attacker runs towards the ball to gain possession. What is the correct decision?
The goal kick is retaken. Attacking players who deliberately remain in the penalty area should not gain an unfair advantage, even if the kick is taken quickly. It is not a yellow card offence unless the player persistently offends.
A goalkeeper takes a quick goal kick when an opponent is still inside the penalty area as they did not have enough time to leave. The ball is kicked by the goalkeeper and accidentally hits the opponent who controls the ball and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards the goal.
At a goal kick the goalkeeper ‘flicks’ the ball up and a team-mate heads/chests the ball back for the goalkeeper to catch. What is the referee’s decision?
The 'initiator' of this attempt to circumvent the Law is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour. Play is restarted with an indirect free kick to the opposing team as outlined in Law 13.2 (depending on where the ball was ‘flicked’ up).
An attacker gets the ball close to the goal line and runs into the opponents’ penalty area. A defender commits a sliding tackle that endangers the safety of the attacker. What is the decision if the tackle occurs after the ball has wholly passed over the goal line (outside the goal, without touching any defender)?
The defender is sent off (red card) for serious foul play. A penalty kick cannot be awarded because the ball was out of play at the time of the tackle. Play is restarted with a goal kick.
A goalkeeper (Team A) takes a goal kick and kicks the ball towards a defender (Team A) who is standing 10 metres away in their penalty area. After the ball is in play, an opposing player (Team B) enters the penalty area, intercepts the pass and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards the goal. Law 16 requires that opponents must be outside the penalty area until the ball is in play (i.e. it is kicked and clearly moves) so Team B player has not committed an offence.
A goal kick has been awarded to Team A. An opponent (Team B) enters the penalty area before the ball is kicked and fouls Team A player. What is the correct decision?
The goal kick is retaken because the ball was not in play at the time of the offence. The offender may be cautioned (yellow card) or sent off (red card), depending on the severity of the offence.
A goal kick is taken quickly by a player of defending Team A. An opponent (Team B) who deliberately remained in the penalty area tries to intercept the ball once it is in play. What is the referee’s decision?
The goal kick is retaken. Players who deliberately remain inside or enter the penalty area before the kick is taken should not gain an unfair advantage, even if the kick is taken quickly.
An attacking player in an offside position runs towards the ball and does not touch the ball before it passes over the goal line for a goal kick. How is play restarted?
A goal kick is awarded to the defending team, assuming the attacker does not impact an opponent.
May a goal be scored directly from a goal kick?
Yes – but only against the opposing team. If the ball directly enters the kicker’s goal, a corner kick is awarded to the opponents.
A goalkeeper takes a goal kick and then, before it has touched another player, the goalkeeper touches the ball again in the penalty area. How is play restarted? What is the sanction?
An indirect free kick is awarded to the opponents for playing the ball twice. If the offence denied an opponent a goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO) or a promising attack (SPA) then the goalkeeper is appropriately sanctioned (even if the goalkeeper handled the ball):
DOGSO = sent off (red card, RC)
SPA = cautioned (yellow card, YC)
A goal kick is taken quickly by a player of defending Team A. An opponent (Team B) genuinely did not have time to leave the penalty area. May the opponent intercept the ball once it is in play?
Yes, this is allowed because Team A tried to gain an advantage by taking the kick quickly and if this ‘goes wrong’ the Law is not there to ‘save’ them. However, an opponent (Team B) who deliberately remains in or enters the penalty area before the kick is taken should not gain an unfair advantage; if they do, the goal kick is retaken.