Law 8 - The Start and Restart of Play | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
8
The Start and
Restart of Play
Law
8
The Start and Restart of Play
Law
8
The Start and
Restart of Play
Law
8
The Start and Restart of Play
Introduction
A kick-off starts both halves of a match, both halves of extra time and restarts play after a goal has been scored. Free kicks (direct or indirect), penalty kicks, throw-ins, goal kicks and corner kicks are other restarts (see Laws 13–17). A dropped ball is the restart when the referee stops play and the Law does not require one of the above restarts.
If an offence occurs when the ball is not in play, this does not change how play is restarted.
8
.
1
Kick-off
Procedure
the referee tosses a coin and the team that wins the toss decides which goal to attack in the first half or to take the kick-off
depending on the above, their opponents take the kick-off or decide which goal to attack in the first half
the team that decided which goal to attack in the first half takes the kick-off to start the second half
for the second half, the teams change ends and attack the opposite goals
after a team scores a goal, the kick-off is taken by their opponents
For every kick-off:
all players, except the player taking the kick-off, must be in their own half of the field of play
the opponents of the team taking the kick-off must be at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the ball until it is in play
the ball must be stationary on the centre mark
the referee gives a signal
the ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves
a goal may be scored directly against the opponents from the kick-off; if the ball directly enters the kicker’s goal, a corner kick is awarded to the opponents
Offences and sanctions
If the player taking the kick-off touches the ball again before it has touched another player, an indirect free kick, or for a handball offence, a direct free kick, is awarded.
In the event of any other kick-off procedure offence, the kick-off is retaken.
8
.
2
Dropped ball
Procedure
If, when play was stopped:
the ball was inside the penalty area, the referee drops it for the defending team goalkeeper in their penalty area
the ball was outside the penalty area, the referee drops it for one player of the team that
has or
would have
retained or
gained possession
(including from the restart if the ball would have gone out of play)
if this can be determined by the referee; otherwise, it is dropped for one player of the team that last touched it. The ball is dropped at its position when play was stopped
, unless it hit a match official or outside agent, in which case it is dropped at the position of the interference/contact
All other players (of both teams) must remain at least 4 m (4.5 yds) from the ball until it is in play
The ball is in play when it touches the ground.
Offences and sanctions
The ball is dropped again if it:
touches a player before it touches the ground
leaves the field of play after it touches the ground, without touching a player
If a dropped ball enters the goal without touching at least two players, play is restarted with:
a goal kick if it enters the opponents’ goal
a corner kick if it enters the team’s goal
FAQs
The ball touches a match official (outside the penalty area), remains on the field of play and the team in possession of the ball changes. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee stops play and drops the ball for the team that would have retained or gained possession if the ball had not touched the match official. If the referee cannot determine this, the ball is dropped for one player of the team that last touched the ball. Play is restarted at the position where the ball made contact with the match official.
After a goal kick has been taken by the goalkeeper, the ball touches the referee outside the penalty area, remains on the field of play and bounces back towards the goal. The goalkeeper handles the ball to prevent it from entering the goal. The referee stops play at this point. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and drops the ball for the goalkeeper’s team at the position where the ball made contact with the referee.
A player of Team A plays the ball which then touches the referee (outside the penalty area), remains on the field of play and, as a result, Team A starts a promising attack. What is the referee’s decision?
The ball touched a match official and Team A started a promising attack. In this case, play is restarted with a dropped ball for one player of the team that would have retained or gained possession if the ball had not touched the referee. The ball is dropped at the position where the ball made contact with the referee.
After an unsuccessful pass by Team A, the ball is heading out for a throw-in. While it is still on the field of play, very close to the touchline, a ball boy/girl catches the ball in an attempt to help restart the game quickly. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and instructs the ball boy/girl to leave the field of play. Play is restarted with a dropped ball for one player of Team B as they would have had the throw-in if the ball had gone out of play. The ball is dropped at the position where the ball made contact with the ball boy/girl. A free kick cannot be awarded because the interference was caused by an outside agent, not by someone named on the team lists.
The ball is kicked by a Team A player and is going to a Team B player when it deflects off the referee to another Team A player rather than to the Team B player. The Team A player immediately creates a promising attack for their team. What is the correct decision?
Play is stopped and restarted with a dropped ball for one player of Team B, as it is clear to the referee that Team B would have gained possession if the ball had not deflected off the referee. The ball is dropped at the position where the ball made contact with the referee.
A player (Team A) is in the middle of the field and attempts to pass the ball to a team-mate (Team A) near the halfway line. As the ball reaches the team-mate it bursts. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play, has the ball changed and then drops the ball for one player of Team A as they would have kept/gained the possession if the ball had not burst. The ball is dropped at its position when play was stopped.
After a goal kick has been taken by Team A, the ball touches the referee outside the penalty area, remains on the field of play and the opponents (Team B) gain possession of the ball. The referee stops play (as the team in possession changes) and restarts play with a dropped ball for the team that would have retained or gained possession had play not been stopped. Where should the referee drop the ball?
The ball is dropped at the position where the ball made contact with the referee.
A player (Team A) plays the ball which then touches the referee (outside the penalty area), remains on the field of play and, as a result, Team A starts a promising attack. What is the referee’s decision?
The ball touched a match official and Team A started a promising attack. In this case, play is restarted with a dropped ball for one player of the team that would have retained or gained possession if the ball had not touched the referee. The ball is dropped at the position where the ball made contact with the referee.
A player of Team A kicks the ball towards a team-mate. The ball moves quickly on the ground and is heading out for a throw-in when it deflects off an assistant referee who is standing on the touchline. As a result, the ball remains on the field of play and is then controlled by another Team A player who starts a promising attack. What is the correct decision?
The ball touched a match official and Team A started a promising attack. In this case, the referee restarts play with a dropped ball at the position where the ball touched the assistant referee. The ball is dropped for Team B as they would have gained possession if the ball had gone out of play for a throw-in.
When the ball is in play in the middle of the field, the referee notices that a player lies on the ground and stops play because the player is seriously injured. The player leaves the field for treatment. How is play restarted?
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for one player of the team that would have retained or gained possession if this can be determined by the referee; otherwise, it is dropped for one player of the team that last touched it. The ball is dropped at its position when play was stopped.
An attacking team player falls to the ground without being fouled while their team-mate has possession of the ball near their opponents’ penalty area. What is the referee’s decision if the player is seriously injured and there is no goal-scoring opportunity for the attacking team?
The referee stops play to ensure that the player receives medical attention. Depending on the injury, the player may be assessed and/or treated on the field of play but must then leave the field and remain off it until play has restarted and one minute has elapsed. As the injury is not the result of an offence, the referee restarts play with a dropped ball to a player of the attacking team at the position of the ball when play was stopped.
An attacker (Team A) takes a shot which is blocked by a defender (Team B). The ball bounces away, remains on the field of play outside the penalty area and is chased by one player from Team A. However, the referee stops play before the Team A player touches the ball because the defender, who was hit by the ball, is seriously injured. What is the correct restart of play?
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A (not for Team B that last touched the ball) because it was clear to the referee that Team A would have gained possession if play had continued. The ball is dropped at its position when play was stopped.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a Team A player touches it several times with their feet, runs into the opponents’ penalty area, and is recklessly tackled by a Team B defender. What is the correct decision?
The player receiving the dropped ball can dribble or continue playing the ball, with no limit to the number of touches. At the time of the tackle, the ball was in play, so the referee awards a penalty kick. Since the foul was reckless, the defender is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour.
A defender and an attacker jump for a header in the middle of the field and collide in the air while competing legally for the ball (neither of them touches it). After that, both players fall to the ground and appear to be seriously injured so the referee stops play to allow the players to be assessed/treated accordingly. How will play be restarted if the ball was outside the penalty area when play was stopped?
Play will be restarted with a dropped ball (as outlined in Law 8).
While the ball is in play, a spectator throws a bottle onto the field towards a player who is running with the ball, close to the touchline. The player stops running to avoid the bottle. What is the referee’s decision?
The object interfered with play so the referee stops a match and has the bottle removed from the field. If the match is not suspended or abandoned for safety reasons, play restarts with a dropped ball (as outlined in Law 8).
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a Team A player touches it several times with their feet and then kicks the ball directly into the opponents’ goal. What is the correct decision if the ball has not touched any other player after it was dropped?
The player receiving the dropped ball can dribble or continue playing the ball, with no limit to the number of touches. However, the player cannot score in the opponents’ goal if the ball does not touch at least one other player (from either team). In this case, play is restarted with a goal kick to Team B.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for a Team A player in the middle of the field. After the ball has touched the ground, an opponent (Team B), who was more than 4 m away, quickly runs to the ball and plays it first. Surprised by this action, the Team A player pulls the opponent to stop a promising attack (SPA). What is the correct decision?
The opponent was allowed to play the ball before the player for whom the ball was dropped because the required distance was respected until the ball touched the ground. From that moment, the ball was in play and any player could play it (no offence by Team B). Consequently, the referee punishes the pulling offence committed by Team A with a direct free kick and a caution (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour (SPA).
While the ball is in play, an attacking player takes a shot at goal. The ball passes the defending goalkeeper and suddenly bursts within the goal area. As a result, it remains on the field of play but does not enter the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and replaces the defective ball. Play is then restarted with a dropped ball for the defending team’s goalkeeper, as the ball was in their penalty area when play was stopped.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a player of Team A notices that the opposing goalkeeper is far from the goal line and kicks the ball towards Team B’s goal. The goalkeeper tries to catch the ball, but it slips out of their hands and goes into the goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is awarded because the dropped ball has touched two players before entering the goal (the player for whom the ball was dropped and the opposing goalkeeper).
The match is drawn and requires extra time. What is the correct procedure to determine the ends and which team will start the first half?
The referee tosses a coin before the start of extra time because this is a new ‘kick-off’. The procedure is the same as at the start of the match:
the team that wins the toss decides which goal to attack in the first half or to take the kick-off
depending on the above, their opponents take the kick-off or decide which goal to attack in the first half
Before kick-off, the player who is going to take the kick stands inside the opponents’ half of the field of play. What does the referee do?
This position is permitted for the kicker, so the referee allows the kick-off to be taken.
An attacker kicks the ball which then hits the defender’s arm inside their penalty area and quickly goes out over the goal line (but not in the goal). Initially, the referee awards a penalty kick for handball, but after an 'on-field review', the referee cancels the penalty kick because the ball touched the defender’s arm when it was close to their body and did not make it unnaturally bigger. What is the correct decision?
If the referee had blown a whistle before the ball went out, play is restarted with a dropped ball for the defending team goalkeeper. If the ball was already outside the field of play when the referee whistled, play restarts with a corner kick.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for a defender (Team A) outside their penalty area. After the ball has touched the ground, an opposing attacker (Team B) who was more than 4 m away, runs towards the defender, plays the ball first and kicks it directly into the goal. What is the correct decision?
The opponent is allowed to play the ball before the player for whom the ball was dropped, provided that the required distance is respected until the ball is in play (i.e. touches the ground). As a goal cannot be scored from a dropped ball unless two or more players have touched the ball, the referee awards a goal kick to Team A.
An assistant referee or a team captain asks the referee if they may toss a coin before the start of the match. Is this procedure allowed?
No. The coin must be tossed by the referee.
A player is instructed by the referee to leave the field of play and change their footwear. When the ball is in play, the player argues with a photographer outside the field and attempts to strike the photographer. The referee stops play for this incident. What is the correct decision?
The player is sent off (red card) for violent conduct. Play is restarted with a dropped ball as outlined in Law 8. A free kick cannot be awarded because the player left the field of play with the referee’s permission and the offence was not committed against someone on the team lists or a match official.
The referee drops the ball for one player of the team that last touched the ball before play has been stopped. After the ball touches the ground, the player notices that an opposing goalkeeper is far from the goal line, takes a shot and kicks the ball directly into the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a goal kick to the opposing team. A goal cannot be awarded because the dropped ball has not touched two players before entering the goal.
The referee has awarded a free kick to Team A. A player from Team B does not agree with this decision and runs furiously at the referee. What is the correct action if the player does not make any verbal comments or gestures?
The player’s behaviour shows clear dissent by action (running at the referee in an aggressive / dissenting manner) and must be punished with a caution (yellow card). As the offence occurs when the ball is not in play, this does not change how the play is restarted (free kick to Team A).
Team A player takes the kick-off and kicks the ball directly into the opponent’s goal. What is the correct decision if a Team B player entered the opponents’ half of the field before the ball was in play?
The referee plays advantage for the offence by Team B and awards the goal.
A player who is already off the field of play (having been treated for an injury) argues with a ball boy/girl and spits at him/her. What is the referee’s decision?
The player is sent off (red card). Play is restarted with a dropped ball as outlined in Law 8 – a free kick cannot be awarded because this offence was not committed against someone on the team lists or a match official.
During the match, while the ball is in play, a coach (Team A) enters the technical area of the opposing team and attempts to strike the opposing coach (Team B). The referee stops play to deal with this situation. What is the correct decision?
The coach of Team A is sent off (red card). Play is restarted with a dropped ball (as outlined in Law 8).
The referee drops the ball for the goalkeeper (Team A) in their penalty area (as outlined in Law 8). After the ball has touched the ground, the goalkeeper does not touch the ball and leaves it for a defender (Team A) who remained 4 m from the ball until it was in play. The defender comes up, kicks the ball and starts an attack. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue. In certain circumstances, Law 8 requires that the ball is dropped for the defending team goalkeeper, however, the goalkeeper does not have to play the ball.
A player is instructed by the referee to leave the field of play to correct the equipment. When the player is outside the field, their coach starts an argument and strikes the player in the face. What is the referee’s decision?
The coach is sent off (red card) for violent conduct. If the referee stops play for this incident, play restarts with a dropped ball as outlined in Law 8. If the ball was already out of play, it is restarted according to the previous decision.
A defender (Team A) makes a clearance under pressure from an attacker (Team B) and tries to kick the ball away without looking where other opponents are standing. Unfortunately, the ball hits another attacker (Team B) in the face who is three metres away, inside the defender’s penalty area. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue (accidental incident, no offence) unless the attacker requires medical attention. In this situation, the referee stops play and allows a doctor to enter the field and examine the player. Play will be restarted with a dropped ball for the defending team goalkeeper in their penalty area.
The referee drops the ball for the goalkeeper in their penalty area. After the ball has touched the ground, the goalkeeper picks the ball up inside the penalty area and then kicks the ball to a team-mate. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue. The goalkeeper may handle the ball in their own penalty area when play is restarted with a dropped ball and the ball is in play (has already touched the ground).
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After that, the ball touches the ground and leaves the field of play, without touching a player. What is the correct decision?
The referee drops the ball again for Team A player.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a player makes a short pass to a team-mate. The team-mate notices that an opposing goalkeeper is far from the goal line, immediately takes a shot and kicks the ball directly into the goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is awarded because the dropped ball has touched two players before entering the goal (the player for whom the ball was dropped and the team-mate). If only one player touches the ball, a goal cannot be scored.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A and a player kicks the ball before it touches the ground. Is this allowed?
No, because the ball is not in play until it touches the ground. If the ball touches the player first (before touching the ground), the referee drops the ball again for Team A.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball has touched the ground, an opposing player (Team B) who remained more than 4 m away comes up and plays the ball first. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue. This is permitted as Law 8 only requires that all players (except the player for whom the ball is dropped) remain at least 4 m from the ball until it is in play (i.e. until it touches the ground).
The player who is taking the kick-off kicks the ball before the referee has given the signal. What is the correct decision?
The kick-off is retaken by the same team.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a player makes a pass to the goalkeeper (Team A) who attempts to kick the ball but does not touch it. The ball enters the goal. What is the correct decision?
Play is restarted with a corner kick to Team B because the dropped ball enters the goal without touching at least two players.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a Team A player makes a long pass to a team-mate who is in an offside position. This player receives the ball and passes it to another Team A player who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
Team A player is penalised for offside. The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to Team B where the offside offence occurred.
The referee has stopped play and awarded a direct free kick to the Team A. The offending player (Team B) has been cautioned (YC), however, one of the players (Team A) approaches the referee and gestures for a red card. What is the referee’s decision?
The player (Team A) receives the YC for showing dissent from the referee’s decision. As this offence occurs when the ball is not in play, the restart cannot be changed so play is restarted with the direct free kick for Team A.
While the ball is in play, a substitute strikes a substitute from the same team outside field of play. How is play restarted?
It is a dropped ball. A free kick can only be given if such an offence is committed by a player against an opposing player or a match official.
May the referee allow a kick-off after a goal was scored when players of the scoring team are off the field celebrating?
No. The Law 8 clearly states that "for every kick-off, all players, except the player taking the kick-off, must be in their own half of the field of play".
Can a goal be scored directly from a dropped ball?
No. If a dropped ball enters the goal without touching at least two players play is restarted with a goal kick (if it enters the opponents' goal) or a corner kick (if it enters the team's goal).
May a player score a goal against the opponents directly from the kick-off?
A goal may be scored directly against the opponents from the kick-off; if the ball directly enters the kicker’s goal, a corner kick is awarded to the opponents.
How is play restarted after the referee accidentally blew the whistle?
Play is restarted with a dropped ball.
The player taking the kick-off touches the ball again before it has touched another player. Is the kick-off retaken?
No, an indirect free kick, or for a handball offence a direct free kick, is awarded to the opponents.
An attacking team player has possession of the ball in the defending team’s penalty area. Play is stopped by the referee (no offence committed). How is play restarted?
The referee will restart the game with a dropped ball for the defending team goalkeeper.
A player plays the ball which then touches the referee (inside the penalty area), remains on the field of play and goes directly into the goal. What is the referee’s decision?
The goal is disallowed and play restarts with a dropped ball for the defending team goalkeeper in their penalty area.