Law 11 - Offside | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
11
Offside
Law
11
Offside
Law
11
Offside
Law
11
Offside
11
.
1
Offside position
It is not an offence to be in an offside position.
A player is in an offside position if:
any part of the head, body or feet is in the opponents’ half (excluding the halfway line) and
any part of the head, body or feet is nearer to the opponents’ goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent
The hands and arms of all players, including the goalkeepers, are not considered. For the purposes of determining offside, the upper boundary of the arm is in line with the bottom of the armpit.
A player is not in an offside position if level with the:
second-last opponent or
last two opponents
11
.
2
Offside offence
A player in an offside position at the moment the ball is played or touched* by a team-mate is only penalised on becoming involved in active play by:
interfering with play by playing or touching a ball passed or touched by a team-mate or
interfering with an opponent by:
preventing an opponent from playing or being able to play the ball by clearly obstructing the opponent’s line of vision or
challenging an opponent for the ball or
clearly attempting to play a ball which is close when this action impacts on an opponent or
making an obvious action which clearly impacts on the ability of an opponent to play the ball
or
gaining an advantage by playing the ball or interfering with an opponent when it has:
rebounded or been deflected off the goalpost, crossbar, match official or an opponent
been deliberately saved by any opponent
*The first point of contact of the ‘play’ or ‘touch’ of the ball should be used; however, when the ball is thrown by the goalkeeper, the last point of contact should be used.
A player in an offside position receiving the ball from an opponent who deliberately played* the ball, including by deliberate handball, is not considered to have gained an advantage, unless it was a deliberate save by any opponent.
*‘Deliberate play’ (excluding deliberate handball) is when a player has control of the ball with the possibility of:
passing the ball to a team-mate;
gaining possession of the ball; or
clearing the ball (e.g. by kicking or heading it)
If the pass, attempt to gain possession or clearance by the player in control of the ball is inaccurate or unsuccessful, this does not negate the fact that the player ‘deliberately played’ the ball.
The following criteria should be used, as appropriate, as indicators that a player was in control of the ball and, as a result, can be considered to have ‘deliberately played’ the ball:
The ball travelled from distance and the player had a clear view of it
The ball was not moving quickly
The direction of the ball was not unexpected
The player had time to coordinate their body movement, i.e. it was not a case of instinctive stretching or jumping, or a movement that achieved limited contact/control
A ball moving on the ground is easier to play than a ball in the air
A ‘save’ is when a player stops, or attempts to stop, a ball which is going into or very close to the goal with any part of the body except the hands/arms (unless the goalkeeper within the penalty area).
In situations where:
a player moving from, or standing in, an offside position is in the way of an opponent and interferes with the movement of the opponent towards the ball, this is an offside offence if it impacts on the ability of the opponent to play or challenge for the ball; if the player moves into the way of an opponent and impedes the opponent’s progress (e.g. blocks the opponent), the offence should be penalised under Law 12
a player in an offside position is moving towards the ball with the intention of playing the ball and is fouled before playing or attempting to play the ball, or challenging an opponent for the ball, the foul is penalised as it has occurred before the offside offence
an offence is committed against a player in an offside position who is already playing or attempting to play the ball, or challenging an opponent for the ball, the offside offence is penalised as it has occurred before the foul challenge
11
.
3
No offence
There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from:
a goal kick
a throw-in
a corner kick
11
.
4
Offences and sanctions
If an offside offence occurs, the referee awards an indirect free kick where the offence occurred, including if it is in the player’s own half of the field of play.
A defending player who leaves the field of play without the referee’s permission will be considered to be on the goal line or touchline for the purposes of offside until the next stoppage in play or until the defending team has played the ball towards the halfway line and it is outside its penalty area. If the player left the field of play deliberately, the player must be cautioned when the ball is next out of play.
An attacking player may step or stay off the field of play not to be involved in active play. If the player re-enters from the goal line and becomes involved in play before the next stoppage in play or the defending team has played the ball towards the halfway line and it is outside its penalty area, the player will be considered to be positioned on the goal line for the purposes of offside. A player who deliberately leaves the field of play and re-enters without the referee’s permission and is not penalised for offside and gains an advantage must be cautioned.
If an attacking player remains stationary between the goalposts and inside the goal as the ball enters the goal, a goal must be awarded unless the player commits an offside offence or a Law 12 offence, in which case play is restarted with an indirect or direct free kick.
FAQs
A forward (Team A) is in an offside position at the moment when a team-mate takes a shot on the goal. After that, the defender (Team B) deliberately handles the ball on the goal line. The ball goes to the forward who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
A player in an offside position receiving the ball from an opponent who deliberately plays the ball, including by deliberate handball, is not considered to have gained an advantage (no offside offence). Since the defender has unsuccessfully tried to stop a goal with their hand(s)/arm(s), the referee plays advantage and awards a goal. There is no disciplinary sanction (the defender is not cautioned or sent off).
A goalkeeper catches the ball and attempts to start a quick counter-attack by throwing the ball to a team-mate near the halfway line. At which moment of the goalkeeper’s contact with the ball is the team-mate’s offside position determined?
When the goalkeeper throws the ball, the offside position is determined at the moment the goalkeeper releases the ball, as this last touch provides a clear and consistent reference point.
A defender (Team A) attempts to kick the ball out of the penalty area. The ball deflects off another defender (Team A) and goes to an attacker (Team B), who has been in an offside position since the first defender kicked the ball. The attacker controls the ball and is unfairly challenged (careless tackle) by an opponent inside Team A’s penalty area. What is the correct decision?
There is no offside offence, as the ball was not played or touched by a team-mate of the attacker. The referee therefore awards a penalty kick to Team B. The careless challenge itself does not warrant a caution, unless it denied the attacker an obvious goal-scoring opportunity.
An attacker is in an offside position when their team-mate makes a long pass towards them. However, the ball does not reach the attacker, as it is intercepted by a defender. The defender controls the ball with their feet, moves a few metres and touches the ball several times. After that, the attacker, who was in an offside position, runs to the ball, tackles the defender and gains possession without committing a foul. What is the referee’s decision?
The attacker, returning from an offside position, becomes involved in play after the defender has gained clear control of the ball and moved with it; therefore, the attacker may fairly challenge the defender. No offside offence or foul has been committed, so the referee allows play to continue.
An attacker and a defender chase the ball in the middle of the field of play. The attacker kicks the ball past the defender, who fails to touch the ball and commits a late careless tackle which stops a promising attack (SPA). However, another attacker, who was clearly in an offside position when their team-mate kicked the ball, gains possession and runs towards the opponents’ goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee cannot apply the advantage because the attacker who gained the ball was offside when it was kicked. Therefore, the referee stops play, awards a direct free kick for the foul (as it occurred before the offside offence), and cautions (yellow card) the defender for unsporting behaviour (SPA offence).
A midfielder plays a through ball towards two team-mates: a winger in an onside position (who controls the ball) and an attacker in an offside position (who does not move towards the ball and does not interfere with any opponent). Both players then run into the opponents’ penalty area, and the winger passes the ball to the attacker, who is now in an onside position. What is the correct decision if the attacker scores a goal?
The attacker who was initially in an offside position did not commit an offside offence when the ball went to and was initially played by the winger (their team-mate). After that, a new phase of play started, and the attacker was then onside when the ball was passed to them, so the referee awards the goal.
A defender from Team A kicks the ball backwards to their goalkeeper. The pass is unsuccessful as the ball deflects off an opponent from Team B and then goes to a Team B attacker who has remained in an offside position since the defender kicked the ball. The attacker controls the ball and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to Team A for offside. It does not matter whether the ball went from one Team B player to another Team B player (who was in an offside position) accidentally or deliberately.
An attacker is in an offside position at the moment a team-mate takes a direct free kick. While the ball is in the air, the attacker jumps to head it but does not touch the ball. The attacker’s movement confuses the goalkeeper, who fails to make a save, and the ball enters the goal. What is the correct decision?
The attacker who was in an offside position has an impact on the goalkeeper by clearly attempting to play the ball when it is close. This is an offside offence, so the referee awards an indirect free kick to the goalkeeper’s team.
An attacker is in an offside position at the moment their team-mate takes a free kick. While the ball is in the air, the attacker moves towards the opposing goalkeeper and jumps in front of them, attempting to head the ball. Although the attacker does not touch the ball, their action clearly impacts on the goalkeeper, who can only parry the ball with one hand and is unable to catch it. What is the correct decision?
The attacker who was in an offside position interferes with the goalkeeper by clearly attempting to play the ball and therefore has an impact on the opponent. This is an offside offence, so the referee awards an indirect free kick to the goalkeeper’s team.
An attacker takes a corner kick to a team-mate. The team-mate then passes the ball back to the kicker, who is in an offside position and plays the ball. What is the correct decision?
Law 11 makes it clear that there is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from a corner kick. However, once the corner kick has been taken, the player who took the corner kick can then be offside. In this situation, the referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team for an offside offence by the kicker (interference with play by playing the ball passed by the team-mate).
A defender (Team A) takes a free kick and passes the ball to an attacker (Team A) who is standing in an offside position in the opponents’ half. The attacker then moves back into Team A’s own half and plays the ball. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and awards an indirect free kick to Team B at the position where the offside offence occurred – where the attacker played the ball and thus interfered with play.
A goalkeeper (Team A) leaves the penalty area and attempts to kick the ball away. The clearance is unsuccessful and the ball goes to an opponent (Team B), who takes a shot with an attacker (also Team B) in an offside position between the goalkeeper and the last defender (Team A). The defender deliberately blocks the shot with their leg and stops the ball from going into the goal. The ball goes to the (offside) attacker who scores. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to the defending team. It is an offside offence because the attacker in an offside position gained an advantage by playing the ball after the deliberate save by the defender.
An attacker is in an offside position when their team-mate makes a long pass towards them. The ball does not reach the attacker because a defender anticipates its movement in the air and clears the ball by deliberately heading it (without being challenged by any opponent). After that, the attacker becomes involved in play, gains possession of the ball and kicks it into the opponents’ goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards the goal (no offside offence) because the attacker received the ball from the defender who deliberately played it. As the ball travelled from distance, the defender anticipated its arrival and had time to position themselves, so they are considered to have had control of the ball.
An attacker is in an offside position when their team-mate takes a shot on goal. The goalkeeper saves the shot and the ball rebounds to the attacker who plays the ball and is then carelessly fouled by a defender inside the penalty area. What is the correct decision?
The attacker who was in an offside position committed an offside offence as they gained an advantage by playing the ball after it was saved by the goalkeeper. The offside offence occurred before the foul, so the referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team, not a penalty kick.
A defender (Team A) attempts to clear the ball out of the penalty area. The clearance is blocked by an opposing player (Team B), and the ball deflects off their foot to a Team B attacker in an offside position, who then scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to Team A. The attacker (Team B) is penalised for an offside offence because they interfered with play, having been in an offside position at the moment the ball was touched by another Team B player.
Before a free kick is taken by Team A, a defender (Team B) deliberately leaves the field of play over the goal line without the referee’s permission to put an attacker (Team A) in an offside position. The attacker then receives the ball directly from the free kick and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is awarded and the defender is cautioned (yellow card) for deliberately leaving the field without permission. The attacker was not in an offside position because, according to Law 11, a defending player who leaves the field is considered to be on the goal line until the next stoppage in play or until the defending team plays the ball towards the halfway line and it is outside the penalty area.
A goalkeeper takes a goal kick and makes a long pass to an attacker (team-mate) who is in an offside position. The attacker controls the ball and is then fouled by a defender outside their penalty area (careless tackle which stops a promising attack, SPA). What is the correct decision?
There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from a goal kick, so the referee penalises the defender’s foul and awards a direct free kick for the attacker’s team. The defender is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour (SPA offence).
A player (Team A) makes a long pass towards a forward (Team A) who is in an offside position, close to the opponents’ penalty area. A defender (Team B) also chases after the ball and kicks it first while running (limited contact with the ball in the air). After that, the forward receives the ball and passes it to a team-mate who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal for an offside offence. The defender’s contact with the ball is not considered to be ‘deliberate play’ because they were not in control of the ball and had no possibility of clearing it by kicking. Although the ball travelled from distance, the defender was running without time to coordinate their body movement.
A winger (Team A) attempts to make a strong pass towards a forward (Team A) who is in an offside position, in the opponents’ penalty area. A defender (Team B) who is a few metres from the winger instinctively stretches out their leg to block/intercept the pass. The ball deflects off the defender’s leg and goes to the forward who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick for an offside offence because the forward gains an advantage by playing the ball when it has deflected off the opponent. The defender is not considered to have ‘deliberately played’ the ball because they had no control of the ball and no possibility of clearing it by kicking. The ball came from a short distance and moved quickly, and the defender had no time to coordinate their body movement.
A player (Team A) makes a long pass towards a forward (Team A) who is in an offside position. The ball moves on the ground and is played by a defender (Team B) who anticipated the direction of the ball and had time to coordinate their body but fails to control the ball. As a result of this contact, the ball goes to the forward who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards the goal (no offside offence) because the forward received the ball from the defender who had deliberately played the ball. The ball travelled from distance and the defender had the possibility of gaining possession of the ball. The fact that this attempt was unsuccessful does not stop it being ‘deliberate play’.
A player (Team A) makes a long pass towards a forward (Team A) who is in an offside position. The pass does not reach the forward because a defender (Team B) controls the ball in the air by using their chest to play the ball towards the goalkeeper (Team B). The pass is inaccurate and the forward intercepts the ball. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue (no offside offence) because the forward received the ball from the defender who had deliberately played the ball. The ball travelled from distance and the defender attempted to pass the ball to the goalkeeper. The fact that the pass was unsuccessful does not stop it being ‘deliberate play’.
A forward is in an onside position at the moment when their team-mate takes a shot and then in an offside position when the goalkeeper saves the shot. After that, the ball goes to the forward who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards the goal. There is no offence because a player’s position for offside is determined at the moment the ball is played or touched by a team-mate (not an opponent).
An attacker from Team A is in an offside position when the ball is passed by a team-mate. Instead of running towards the ball, this attacker moves in the opposite direction and interferes with the movement of a defender from Team B. Neither touches the ball, which goes to another attacker from Team A, who was in an onside position at the time of the pass. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team for an offside offence, as the first attacker interfered with an opponent by clearly affecting the defender’s ability to play or challenge for the ball.
Two attacking players move towards the opponents’ goal which is defended only by the goalkeeper. One attacker runs with the ball into the penalty area and passes the ball to the other attacker who is nearer to the opponents’ goal line than the ball and the second-last opponent. The attacker receives the ball and shoots over the crossbar. What is the correct decision?
Play is restarted with an indirect free kick to the defending team from the place where the offside offence occurred. If the ball was received (played) by the attacker inside the goal area, the free kick may be taken anywhere in that area.
A player takes a throw-in quickly and delivers the ball to a team-mate who is in an offside position. The team-mate controls the ball inside the opponents’ penalty area and is then carelessly fouled by an opponent. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick because there is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from a throw-in.
An attacker passes the ball to a team-mate in an offside position and, immediately after that, is fouled by a defender (reckless tackle outside the penalty area). The team-mate waits for the ball, receives it a few seconds after the foul and then runs towards the opponents’ goal (one-on-one situation). What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play, cautions (yellow card) the defender and awards a direct free kick to the attacking team as the foul has occurred before the offside offence. The referee could not allow play to continue because the attacking team could not benefit from the advantage in this situation as their team-mate was offside.
Team A player takes a throw-in. The ball enters the field of play, deflects off a defender (Team B) and goes to an attacker (Team A) who was in an offside position at the moment the throw-in was taken. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue as a player cannot be offside from a throw-in and, after the throw-in was taken, the ball was not touched or played by any Team A player (until it reached the attacker).
A midfielder (Team A) makes a long pass to a forward (Team A) who is aware of their offside position and initially does not move towards the ball. After that, a defender (Team B) shields the ball to let it go out for a goal kick (without touching it) but the ball slows down and does not leave the field of play. The forward notices this, catches up with the defender and challenges for the ball. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and awards an indirect free kick to Team B where the offside offence occurred (where the forward challenged the defender for the ball).
A player kicks a free kick into the opponents’ penalty area. While the ball is in the air, a defender holds an attacker and prevents them from jumping for the ball. After that, the ball goes to another attacker who scores a goal, having been in an offside position when the ball was last played by a team-mate. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal (because of the offside offence) and awards a penalty kick (as the holding offence occurred before the offside offence). If the foul denied an obvious-goal scoring opportunity (DOGSO), the defender is sent off (red card, no attempt to play the ball or challenge for the ball). If it was not a DOGSO situation, the defender is cautioned (yellow card).
A goalkeeper takes a free kick inside their penalty area and makes a long pass to a team-mate who is standing in the opponents’ half and who is nearer to the opponents’ goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent. The team-mate receives the ball, runs into the opponents’ penalty area and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to the opposing team. It is an offside offence if the player interferes with play by playing/touching the ball received directly from the free kick.
An attacker is in an offside position at the moment the ball is kicked towards the penalty area by a team-mate. This attacker moves and deliberately blocks an opponent (there is contact). Another attacker (who was onside) receives the ball and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards a direct free kick to the defending team for the Law 12 physical offence which is penalised (rather than any offside offence) as it is the more serious offence.
An attacker (Team A) is in an offside position when a defender (Team B) passes the ball to a goalkeeper (Team B). The attacker intercepts the ball, runs into the penalty area and is fouled by the goalkeeper. What is the correct decision?
The attacker is not penalised for offside because the attacker received the ball from the opponent who deliberately played the ball. In this case, the referee awards a penalty kick and takes appropriate disciplinary action against the goalkeeper.
An attacking team player is in an offside position at the moment when their team-mate takes a free kick. After the ball is in play, a defending team player pushes the attacker inside the penalty area before the attacker starts moving towards the ball. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick because the attacker in an offside position is fouled before any offside offence has been committed. The offender receives the appropriate disciplinary sanction.
Team A player takes a throw-in and throws the ball towards the opponents’ penalty area. An attacker (Team A) attempts to take a shot but fails to kick the ball. The attacker’s movement confuses the goalkeeper (Team B) and the ball enters the goal (without touching any player except the thrower). What is the correct decision if the attacker was in an offside position at the moment the ball was thrown?
There is no offside offence because the attacker received the ball directly from a throw-in. As a goal cannot be scored directly from a throw-in, the referee awards a goal kick to Team B.
A player starts a counter-attack and passes the ball to a team-mate who is nearer to the opponents’ goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent. At the time of the pass, the team-mate is in their own half of the field except one extended arm that is beyond the halfway line. The team-mate receives the ball and starts running towards the opponents’ goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue. The hands and arms of players are not considered so the team-mate is not in an offside position.
A player (Team A) makes a pass to an attacker (Team A) who is in an offside position in the opponents’ penalty area. The attacker moves very close to a defender (Team B) who accidentally kicks the ball into Team B’s goal. What is the correct decision?
The attacker is penalised for an offside offence if their action clearly impacted on the defender. In this case, the referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to Team B.
A defender (Team A) tries to kick the ball out of the penalty area. The ball hits another defender (Team A) and goes to an attacker (Team B) who has been in an offside position since the first defender kicked the ball. The attacker scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is awarded as the ball has not been played/touched by a team-mate of the scorer.
While a forward (Team A) takes a shot on the goal, a midfielder (Team A) is standing in an offside position on the goal line. The midfielder does not attempt to play the ball and does not challenge the goalkeeper and other Team B players (no impact on the opponents). The ball goes directly into the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a goal because the midfielder has not committed an offside offence.
An attacker tries to kick the ball and score a goal. The attacker touches the ball but fails to take a shot. As a result, the ball accidentally goes to a team-mate who is in an offside position. The team-mate scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team where the offside offence occurred. Law 11 states that a player in an offside position is penalised for interfering with play by playing/touching a ball passed or touched by a team-mate (it is not required that the ball is received from a team-mate who deliberately passed the ball).
A midfielder (Team A) passes the ball towards an attacker (Team A) who is in an offside position and challenges for the ball. After that, a defender (Team B) pushes the attacker in a reckless manner outside the penalty area. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to Team B because the offside offence occurred before the foul. The referee must also take appropriate disciplinary action against the defender and caution (yellow card) the player for the reckless push.
A player (Team A) passes the ball to an attacker (Team A) who is nearer to the opponents’ goal line than the ball and the goalkeeper (Team B). At the time of the pass, there is one defender (Team B) nearer to the goal line than the attacker. The attacker scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The attacker was in an offside position. The referee awards an indirect free kick to Team B where the offside offence occurred – where the attacker interfered with play (played the ball).
A midfielder (Team A) passes the ball towards an attacker (Team A) who is in an offside position and challenges for the ball. After that, a defender (Team B) pulls the attacker’s shirt outside the penalty area and, in the opinion of the referee, stops a promising attack (SPA). The referee stops play and notices that the assistant referee has indicated an offside offence. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to Team B because the offside offence occurred before the foul. As the attacker was in an offside position, there was no promising attack, so the defender cannot be cautioned for SPA (no yellow card).
A defender (Team A) starts an attack and tries to make a long pass to an attacker (Team A) who is standing in an offside position in the opponents’ half. The attacker moves back into Team A’s half and plays the ball. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play and awards an indirect free kick to Team B where the offside offence occurred – where the attacker interfered with play (played the ball).
A player (Team A) takes a corner kick and passes the ball to a team-mate who is standing close, in an offside position. After that, the team-mate passes the ball to another Team A player (in an onside position) who heads the ball and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is awarded. There is no offside offence because the team-mate received the ball directly from the corner kick.
Which parts of the player’s body are considered when judging an offside position?
Any part of the head, body or feet, apart from hands and arms of all players (including the goalkeepers). For the purposes of determining offside, the upper boundary of the arm is in line with the bottom of the armpit.
An attacker is in an offside position at the moment when his/her team-mate takes a free kick. The attacker receives the ball directly and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team. It is an offside offence if the player interferes with play by playing/touching the ball received directly from the free kick.
A forward is in an offside position at the moment when a midfielder (his/her team-mate) takes a shot on the goal. After that, the ball rebounds off the crossbar and goes to the forward who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team. It is an offside offence as the forward is considered to have gained an advantage from being in an offside position and is therefore penalised for playing the ball.
An attacker (Team A) in an offside position and a defender (Team B) jump for a header and compete for the ball. Neither of them touches the ball which goes to another Team A player who is in an onside position and scores. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to Team B. It is an offside offence because the attacker clearly attempted to play the ball which was close and this action impacted on the opponent.
A defending player (Team A) challenges an attacking player (Team B) and deliberately kicks the ball (no foul is committed). After that, the ball goes directly to another Team B player who is in an offside position. What is the correct decision?
The referee allows play to continue. There is no offside offence if a player in an offside position receives the ball from an opponent who deliberately plays the ball.
A forward (Team A) is in an offside position at the moment when a midfielder (Team A) takes a shot on the goal. The goalkeeper (Team B) saves the shot and the ball goes to the forward who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to Team B. It is an offside offence – the forward is penalised for gaining an advantage by playing the ball when it has been deliberately saved by an opponent.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a Team A player makes a long pass to a team-mate who is in an offside position. This player receives the ball and passes it to another Team A player who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
Team A player is penalised for offside. The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to Team B where the offside offence occurred.
A forward is in an offside position at the moment when a midfielder (his/her team-mate) takes a shot on the goal. After that, the ball rebounds off a goalpost and goes to the forward who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team. It is an offside offence as the forward is considered to have gained an advantage of being in an offside position and penalised for playing the ball.
A goalkeeper takes a goal kick and makes a long pass to a team-mate who is standing in the opponents’ half nearer to the opponents’ goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent. The team-mate receives the ball, runs into the opponents’ penalty area and scores a goal. What is the referee’s decision?
The goal is awarded. There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from a goal kick.
A midfielder (Team A) passes the ball back to a defender (Team A). The defender gains control of the ball but, before he/she plays the ball, an opposing player (Team B) came from an offside position, made a challenge and intercepted the ball. What is the referee’s decision?
Play continues – the Team B player is not 'offside' as the ball was not played by another Team B player.
A defending player (Team A) tries to pass the ball to his/her goalkeeper (Team A) but instead plays the ball to an attacking player (Team B) who is in an offside position. After that, the attacker attempts to play the ball and this action impacts on the goalkeeper. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue. The attacker (Team B) is not considered to have gained an advantage as the defender (Team A) deliberately played the ball.
An attacking player (Team A) in an offside position receives the ball from a defending player (Team B) who made a clear movement towards the ball and tried to intercept a pass that could lead to a clear goal-scoring opportunity. Is the defender’s action considered a ‘deliberate save’ for offside?
No, because a ‘save’ is only when a player stops, or attempts to stop, a ball which is going into or very close to the goal. The referee allows play to continue as the attacking player (Team A) is not considered to have gained an advantage as the defender (Team B) deliberately played the ball.
A player starts a counter-attack and passes the ball to a team-mate who is standing in their own half, nearer to the opponents’ goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent. The team-mate receives the ball and starts running towards the opponents’ goal. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue because the team-mate is not in an offside position as no part of the attacker's body (i.e. any part of the head, body or feet) is in the opponents’ half.
A player scores a goal while a defending player lies injured next to the goal line (on the field of play). What is the referee's decision?
If there are two or more opponents nearer the goal line then the attacker is not offside and a goal is awarded. It does not matter what position a defender is in: standing, sitting, lying etc.
A defending player leaves the field of play without the referee’s permission. How should this situation be judged regarding the opponents’ offside position?
The player shall be considered to be on the goal line or touchline until the next stoppage of play or until the defending team has played the ball towards the halfway line and it is outside their penalty area.
A player in an offside position is moving towards the ball with the intention of playing the ball and is fouled in the penalty area before playing the ball or challenging an opponent for the ball. What is the referee's decision?
It is a penalty kick. The foul is penalised as it has occurred before the offside offence.
An attacking player remains stationary between the goalposts and inside the goal when the ball enters the goal. What is the referee’s decision?
A goal must be awarded unless the player commits an offside offence or a Law 12 offence, in which case play is restarted with an indirect or direct free kick.
Can a player be penalised for an offside offence if he/she receives the ball directly from a throw-in?
No. There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from:
a goal kick
a throw-in
a corner kick
A player moving from an offside position interferes with the movement of the opponent towards the ball. Is it an offside offence?
Yes, if it impacts on the ability of the opponent to play or challenge for the ball. If the player intentionally impeded the opponent’s progress (e.g. blocks the opponent), the offence should be penalised under Law 12.
A free kick is awarded for an offside offence. A player kicks the free kick directly into the opponents’ goal. What is the referee’s decision?
If an offside offence occurs, the referee awards an indirect free kick. A goal cannot be scored directly from an indirect free kick; a goal kick is awarded to the opponents.
An attacking team player is fouled after he/she has passed the ball to a team-mate who was in an offside position when the pass was made. What is the referee’s decision?
Whichever offence occurs first is penalised so the foul is only penalised if it occurs before the player in an offside position commits an offside offence (e.g. touched the ball).
If both offences occur at the same time the foul is penalised as it is more serious i.e. offside is punished with an indirect free kick whereas the foul is punished with a direct free kick.
After the ball has been played by Team A, an offence is committed against a player of Team A who was in an offside position and was already challenging an opponent (Team B) for the ball inside the opponents’ penalty area. What is the referee’s decision?
An indirect free kick is awarded to Team B. The offside offence is penalised as it has occurred before the foul challenge.
The shot by an attacking player (Team A) is deflected by an opponent (Team B) to another attacker (Team A) who plays the ball having previously been in an offside position. What is the referee’s decision?
It is an offside offence. The referee will award an indirect free kick to Team B where the offside offence occurred.
An attacking player in an offside position is clearly obstructing the goalkeeper’s line of vision. What is the referee’s decision?
It is an offside offence. The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team. The attacking player is penalised for preventing an opponent from playing or being able to play the ball by clearly obstructing the goalkeeper’s line of vision.
An attacker (C) is in an offside position, not interfering with an opponent, when a team-mate (A) passes the ball to player (B) in an onside position who runs towards the opponents’ goal and later passes the ball to the team-mate (C) who is in an onside position at this moment. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue as no offside offence is committed.
An attacking player steps off the field of play not to be involved in active play. After that, the player re-enters from the goal line. How should this situation be judged in terms of an offside position?
If the attacking player re-enters from the goal line and becomes involved in play before:
the next stoppage in play or
the defending team has played the ball towards the halfway line and it is outside its penalty area
the player shall be considered to be positioned on the goal line for the purposes of offside.
An attacking player in an offside position (Team A) runs towards the ball but does not play the ball or prevent the opponent (Team B) from playing or being able to play the ball. What is the referee’s decision?
It is not an offside offence so the referee allows play to continue. The attacking player is only penalised if he/she plays the ball or interferes with an opponent.
A defending player (Team A) stops a ball which is going into the goal. After that, the ball is played by an attacking player (Team B) who was in an offside position when the ball was last touched or played by a team-mate. What is the referee’s decision?
It is an offside offence. The referee stops play and awards an indirect free kick to the defending Team A. The attacking player (Team B) is penalised for gaining an advantage by playing the ball when it has been deliberately saved by the opponent.
An attacking team player in an offside position (A) runs towards the ball and a team-mate in an onside position (B) also runs towards the ball and plays it. The first player (A) does not touch the ball and does not impact any opponent’s ability to play or challenge for the ball. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue as the attacking team player (A) has not committed an offside offence.