Law 14 - 14 The Penalty Kick | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
14
The Penalty Kick
Law
14
The Penalty Kick
Law
14
The Penalty Kick
Law
14
The Penalty Kick
Introduction
A penalty kick is awarded if a player commits a direct free kick offence inside their penalty area or off the field as part of play as outlined in Laws 12 and 13.
A goal may be scored directly from a penalty kick.
14
.
1
Procedure
The ball must be stationary, with part of the ball touching or overhanging the centre of the penalty mark and the goalposts, crossbar and goal net must not be moving.
The player taking the penalty kick must be clearly identified.
The defending goalkeeper must remain on the goal line, facing the kicker, between the goalposts, until the ball is kicked. The goalkeeper must not behave in a way that unfairly distracts the kicker, e.g. delay the taking of the kick or touch the goalposts, crossbar or goal net.
The players other than the kicker and goalkeeper must be:
at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the penalty mark
behind the penalty mark
inside the field of play
outside the penalty area
After the players have taken positions in accordance with this Law, the referee signals for the penalty kick to be taken.
The player taking the penalty kick must kick the ball forward; backheeling is permitted provided the ball moves forward.
When the ball is kicked, the defending goalkeeper must have at least part of one foot touching, in line with, or behind, the goal line.
The ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves.
The kicker must not play the ball again until it has touched another player.
The penalty kick is completed when the ball stops moving, goes out of play or the referee stops play for any offence.
Additional time is allowed for a penalty kick to be taken and completed at the end of each half of the match or extra time. When additional time is allowed, the penalty kick is completed when, after the kick has been taken, the ball stops moving, goes out of play, is played by any player (including the kicker) other than the defending goalkeeper, or the referee stops play for an offence by the kicker or the kicker’s team. If a defending team player (including the goalkeeper) commits an offence and the penalty is missed/saved, the penalty is retaken.
14
.
2
Offences and sanctions
Once the referee has signalled for a penalty kick to be taken, the kick must be taken; if it is not taken, the referee may take disciplinary action before signalling again for the kick to be taken.
If, before the ball is in play, one of the following occurs:
the kicker accidentally kicks the ball with both feet simultaneously or the ball touches their non-kicking foot or leg immediately after the kick:
if the ball enters the goal from the kick, the kick is retaken
if the ball does not enter the goal from the kick, an indirect free kick is awarded
a team-mate of the player taking the penalty kick is penalised for encroachment only if:
the encroachment clearly impacted on the goalkeeper; or
the encroaching player plays the ball or challenges an opponent for the ball and then scores, attempts to score or creates a goal-scoring opportunity
a team-mate of the goalkeeper is penalised for encroachment only if:
the encroachment clearly impacted on the kicker; or
the encroaching player plays the ball or challenges an opponent for the ball and this prevents the opponents from scoring, attempting to score or creating a goal-scoring opportunity
the player taking the penalty kick or a team-mate offends:
if the ball enters the goal
from the kick
, the kick is retaken
if the ball does not enter the goal
from the kick
, the referee stops play and restarts with an indirect free kick
except for the following when play will be stopped and restarted with an indirect free kick, regardless of whether or not a goal is scored:
a penalty kick is kicked backwards
a team-mate of the identified kicker takes the kick; the referee cautions the player who took the kick
feinting to kick the ball once the kicker has completed the run-up (feinting in the run-up is permitted); the referee cautions the kicker
the goalkeeper offends:
if the ball enters the goal
from the kick
, a goal is awarded
if the ball misses the goal or rebounds from the crossbar or goalpost(s), the kick is only retaken if the goalkeeper’s offence clearly impacted on the kicker
if the ball is prevented from entering the goal by the goalkeeper, the kick is retaken
If the goalkeeper’s offence results in the kick being retaken, the goalkeeper is warned for the first offence in the game and cautioned for any subsequent offence(s) in the game
a team-mate of the goalkeeper offends:
if the ball enters the goal
from the kick
, a goal is awarded
if the ball does not enter the goal
from the kick
, the kick is retaken
a player of both teams offends, the kick is retaken unless a player commits a more serious offence (e.g. 'illegal' feinting)
both the goalkeeper and the kicker commit an offence at the same time, the kicker is cautioned and play restarts with an indirect free kick to the defending team
If, after the penalty kick has been taken:
the kicker
deliberately
touches the ball again before it has touched another player:
an indirect free kick (or direct free kick for a handball offence) is awarded
the ball is touched by an outside agent as it moves forward:
the kick is retaken unless the ball is going into the goal and the interference does not prevent the goalkeeper or a defending player playing the ball, in which case the goal is awarded if the ball enters the goal (even if contact was made with the ball) unless the interference was by the attacking team.
the ball rebounds into the field of play from the goalkeeper, the crossbar or the goalposts and is then touched by an outside agent:
the referee stops play
play is restarted with a dropped ball at the position where it touched the outside agent
14
.
3
Summary table
FAQs
At a penalty kick, the kicker accidentally kicks the ball with both feet simultaneously. What is the correct decision if the goalkeeper had both feet in front of the goal line before the ball was in play, and then prevents the ball from entering the goal?
The penalty kick is retaken.
A player slips while taking a penalty kick. The ball accidentally touches the player’s non-kicking foot/leg immediately after the kick, and the goalkeeper makes a save (the ball does not enter the goal and rebounds into the field of play). What is the correct decision if the goalkeeper has not committed any offence?
The referee stops play and awards an indirect free kick to the defending team where the second touch occurred unless the referee decides to play advantage.
While taking the penalty kick, after completing the run-up, the kicker feints to kick the ball and, at the same time, the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line. What is the referee’s decision?
The kicker is cautioned (yellow card, YC) and play restarts with an indirect free kick to the defending team.
While taking a penalty kick, a player kicks the ball with their right foot in such a way that the ball clearly moves, accidentally touches the player’s left foot and then enters the goal from the kick. What is the correct decision?
A goal cannot be scored from a penalty kick if the kicker touches the ball again before it has touched another player. However, as the kicker’s second touch was accidental, the penalty kick is retaken.
A defender (Team A) attempts to kick the ball out of the penalty area. The ball deflects off another defender (Team A) and goes to an attacker (Team B), who has been in an offside position since the first defender kicked the ball. The attacker controls the ball and is unfairly challenged (careless tackle) by an opponent inside Team A’s penalty area. What is the correct decision?
There is no offside offence, as the ball was not played or touched by a team-mate of the attacker. The referee therefore awards a penalty kick to Team B. The careless challenge itself does not warrant a caution, unless it denied the attacker an obvious goal-scoring opportunity.
While the player taking the penalty kick is running to the ball, their team-mate touches the penalty area line with the foot before the ball is kicked. The goalkeeper saves the kick and the ball rebounds into the field to the attacking team player who encroached, who then plays the ball and scores. What is the correct decision?
Players other than the kicker and the goalkeeper must be outside the penalty area until the ball is in play. Since the line is part of the penalty area and the player’s foot was touching it before the ball was kicked, the team-mate of the kicker encroached and is penalised, as this movement had an impact (the same player scored). The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to the defending team where the attacking player entered the penalty area. There is no disciplinary sanction.
A goalkeeper (Team A) leaves the penalty area and carelessly fouls an attacker (Team B), denying the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity. The referee allows play to continue because another Team B player gains control of the ball and takes a shot. As the ball is heading towards the goal, a defender (Team A) deliberately moves their hand/arm towards the ball and prevents it from entering the goal. What decisions does the referee make?
The referee awards a penalty kick to Team B. The defender is sent off (red card) for denying a goal by committing a deliberate handball offence. The goalkeeper is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour but is not sent off because applying advantage restored the obvious goal-scoring opportunity.
A goalkeeper takes a goal kick and plays the ball towards a defender who is inside their penalty area, facing the goalkeeper and unaware of an opposing attacker waiting outside the penalty area. After the ball is kicked and clearly moves, the attacker quickly runs into the penalty area and is about to intercept the ball. The defender then makes a late challenge and carelessly fouls the attacker. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The defender is cautioned (yellow card) if the illegal challenge for the ball denied the attacker an obvious goal-scoring opportunity. Law 16 – The Goal Kick requires opponents to be outside the penalty area until the ball is in play, so the attacker has not committed an offence.
An attacker is carelessly tackled by a defender inside the penalty area. The defender’s action stops a promising attack (SPA) because the attacker loses possession of the ball which is then kicked outside the penalty area by another defender. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The defender is not cautioned for the SPA offence, as the foul was part of a challenge for the ball punished with the penalty kick, and the careless tackle itself does not warrant a yellow card.
An attacker (Team A) is legally tackled from behind by a midfielder (Team B) and falls to the ground near Team B’s penalty area. The ball then rolls into the penalty area, where it is caught by a Team B defender who assumes a free kick has been awarded, even though the referee has not whistled or signalled to stop play. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick for a handball offence because the Team B defender deliberately handled the ball while it was still in play.
Play is restarted with a dropped ball for Team A. After the ball touches the ground, a Team A player touches it several times with their feet, runs into the opponents’ penalty area, and is recklessly tackled by a Team B defender. What is the correct decision?
The player receiving the dropped ball can dribble or continue playing the ball, with no limit to the number of touches. At the time of the tackle, the ball was in play, so the referee awards a penalty kick. Since the foul was reckless, the defender is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour.
At a penalty kick, a defending team player shouts loudly at the moment when an attacking team player is about to kick the ball. This unfair interference distracts the kicker and the penalty is missed. What is the correct decision?
The penalty kick is retaken and the defending player is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour.
An attacker and several defenders enter the penalty area before a penalty kick is taken. The goalkeeper saves the kick and the ball rebounds to the attacker who encroached and who then scores a goal. What is the correct decision if the encroachment by the defenders did not have impact?
Although player(s) of both teams entered the penalty area early, the penalty kick is not retaken because only the encroachment by the attacker had impact (playing the ball and scoring a goal). Consequently, the referee awards an indirect free kick for the defending team where the attacker entered the penalty area (no disciplinary sanction).
At a penalty kick, a team-mate of the kicker (attacking team player) enters the penalty arc before the ball is in play. What is the correct decision if the kicker scores a goal directly from the penalty kick?
The goal is awarded if there was no clear impact on the goalkeeper. If the encroachment clearly impacted the goalkeeper, the penalty kick is retaken (no disciplinary sanction for the encroaching player).
At a penalty kick, a team-mate of the kicker (attacking team player) enters the penalty area before the ball is in play. After that, the goalkeeper saves the kick and the ball rebounds into the field to the attacking team player who encroached. The player passes the ball towards a team-mate and thus creates a goal-scoring opportunity. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick for the defending team where the attacking team player entered the penalty area. There is no disciplinary sanction.
At the taking of a penalty kick, the kicker completes their run-up and then deliberately stops and feints to kick the ball. At the same time, a team-mate of the goalkeeper enters the penalty area before the ball is in play. The ball rebounds from the goalkeeper and the defending team player who encroached prevents another attacking team player from scoring a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team and cautions the kicker (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour. The penalty kick is not retaken because illegal feinting is a more serious offence than illegal encroachment.
At a penalty kick, a defending player and an attacking player enter the penalty area before the ball is in play. After that, the goalkeeper saves the kick, the ball rebounds into the field and both encroaching players challenge for the ball. What is the correct decision?
The penalty kick is retaken.
At a penalty kick, a team-mate of the kicker (attacking team player) enters the penalty area before the ball is in play. After that, the ball rebounds off the goalpost and goes to the encroaching player who plays the ball and attempts to score but the shot goes over the crossbar. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick for the defending team where the attacking team player entered the penalty area. There is no disciplinary sanction.
At a penalty kick, a team-mate of the kicker (attacking team player) enters the penalty area before the ball is in play. After that, the goalkeeper saves the shot, the ball goes over the crossbar and leaves the field of play for a corner kick. What is the correct decision if the attacking player who encroached did not impact on the goalkeeper?
The encroachment by the attacking team player is not penalised because it had no impact so the referee awards a corner kick.
At a penalty kick, a team-mate of the kicker (attacking team player) enters the penalty area before the ball is in play. The goalkeeper saves the kick and the ball rebounds into the field to the attacking team player who encroached who then plays the ball and scores. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to the defending team where the attacking team player entered the penalty area. There is no disciplinary sanction.
A penalty kick has been awarded to Team A. The identified kicker has completed their run-up, deliberately stops at the end and feints to kick the ball. At the same time, a team-mate of the goalkeeper (Team B) enters the penalty area before the ball is in play. The kicker scores a goal directly from a penalty kick. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team and cautions the kicker (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour. The encroachment by the defending player is not penalised because it had no impact.
At a penalty kick, a team-mate of the goalkeeper enters the penalty area before the ball is in play. What is the correct decision if the ball rebounds from the goalkeeper or goal frame?
The penalty kick is retaken only if the encroachment clearly impacted on the kicker or the ball rebounds into play and the encroaching player then plays the ball or challenges an opponent for the ball and prevents the opponents from scoring, attempting to score or creating a goal-scoring opportunity.
Before a penalty kick is taken, the referee notices that part of the ball overhangs the centre of the penalty mark but does not touch it. What is the referee’s decision?
The ball position is correct because Law 14 clarifies that part of the ball must either touch or overhang the centre of the penalty mark so the referee allows the penalty kick to be taken.
A defender accidentally touches the ball with the hand/arm within their penalty area and stops a promising attack (SPA). The defender does not move the hand/arm towards the ball, however, the hand/arm has made their body unnaturally bigger. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick for a handball offence (unnatural position of the hand/arm). The defender is not cautioned (no yellow card) for the SPA offence because the handball offence was not deliberate.
A defender’s hand/arm prevents the ball from going into the goal. The defender did not deliberately handle the ball, but their hand/arm made the defender’s body unnaturally bigger. What is the correct decision if the hand/arm makes contact with the ball inside the defender’s penalty area?
The referee awards a penalty kick for a handball offence (unnatural position of the hand/arm). The defender is cautioned (yellow card) for denying the opposing team a goal but is not sent off (no red card) because the handball offence was not deliberate.
A player commits a handball offence within their penalty area which denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO) and the referee awards a penalty kick. What is the correct sanction?
When the referee awards a penalty kick for a handball DOGSO offence, the player is:
cautioned (yellow card) for a non-deliberate handball offence
sent off (red card) for a deliberate handball offence
An attacker takes a shot and is then recklessly tackled by a defender. The contact occurs before the ball leaves the field of play. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a direct free kick (or penalty kick if the offence occurred inside the defender’s penalty area) and cautions the defender (yellow card). The fact that the reckless tackle occurred after the shot was taken is irrelevant because the ball was still in play at the time of the offence.
A player deliberately steps with some force on an opponent’s foot. This action is not part of a challenge for the ball, as the ball is in play on the opposite side of the field. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a direct free kick or penalty kick, depending on where the offence occurred. The offending player is:
sent off (red card) for violent conduct if excessive force or brutality was used; or
cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour in other cases.
A defender deliberately handles the ball inside their penalty area while competing with an attacker for possession. At this moment, several players from both teams are inside the penalty area, meaning the handball does not deny the attacking team an obvious goal-scoring opportunity or stop a promising attack. What is the correct decision?
Any deliberate handball by a defending team player inside their penalty area is penalised with a penalty kick. No disciplinary sanction is required as there was no DOGSO nor stopping a promising attack.
An attacker takes a shot and is then recklessly tackled by a defender inside the penalty area. Even though the ball is heading towards the goal, the referee blows the whistle immediately after a foul, before the ball enters the goal. What is the correct decision?
The ball was heading towards the goal, so the referee should have applied advantage. However, as the whistle stopped play before the ball entered the goal, a goal cannot be awarded. In this situation, play is restarted with a penalty kick and the defender is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour (reckless tackle).
After a penalty kick has been taken, the ball rebounds from the crossbar, remains on the field of play, and goes to the kicker, who then scores a goal. What is the correct decision if no other player touches the ball between the first and second shot?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team because the kicker cannot touch the ball again before it has touched another player. The free kick is taken from the position of the second touch, unless it occurred in the goal area, in which case the free kick may be taken from any point within that area. There is no disciplinary action.
A defender pulls an attacker’s shirt, preventing the opponent from reaching the ball and thereby denying an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). The contact begins outside the defender’s penalty area and continues into the penalty area. What is the correct decision?
The referee applies advantage for the offence committed outside the area and awards a penalty kick for the pulling in the penalty area. The defender is sent off (red card) for DOGSO, as the offence was neither an attempt to play nor a challenge for the ball.
During a penalty kick, the goalkeeper touches the crossbar causing it to move which distracts the kicker who is running to the ball. What is the correct decision if the shot misses the goal?
The penalty kick is retaken and the goalkeeper is warned if it is their first offence.
After a corner kick has been taken, a defender and an attacker accidentally collide in the penalty area and fall over the goal line. Afterwards, the defender pushes the attacker while the ball is still in play. What is the correct decision if this occurs outside the field of play?
If the nearest point to the offence on the boundary line is:
within the defender’s penalty area, a penalty kick is awarded
outside the penalty area, a direct free kick is awarded
Regardless of the restart decision, the defender receives the appropriate disciplinary sanction:
a caution (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour, or
a sending-off (red card) for violent conduct
A defender pulls the shirt of an attacker inside the penalty area when the ball is in play. It was not an obvious goal-scoring opportunity but it stopped a promising attack (SPA) because the attacker lost possession of the ball. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The defender is cautioned (yellow card) for SPA because their offence was not an attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball.
A player denies the opposing team an obvious goal-scoring opportunity by committing a deliberate handball offence. How is play restarted? What is the sanction?
The referee awards a direct free kick or a penalty kick if the offence was committed within the offender’s penalty area. The offending player is sent off (red card, RC) wherever the offence occurred.
A player attempts to play the ball and commits a foul within their own penalty area which denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity. What is the referee’s decision if the advantage cannot be applied?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The player is cautioned (yellow card, YC) because the offence was an attempt to play the ball.
During a match, before a penalty kick is taken, the defending team goalkeeper approaches the kicker and unfairly distracts them to delay the taking of the kick. What is the correct decision?
The goalkeeper is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour (showing a lack of respect for the game/opponent) or for delaying the restart of play.
A player challenges for the ball in a careless manner and commits a foul within their own penalty area which denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The player is cautioned (yellow card) for unsporting behaviour and not sent off because the DOGSO offence was a challenge for the ball.
A defender holds an attacker inside the defender’s penalty area while the ball is in play. The contact impedes the attacker’s movement and denies the attacker an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick and sends off (red card) the defender because their DOGSO offence was neither an attempt to play the ball nor a challenge for the ball.
A defender (Team A) was slightly injured and left the field of play for treatment. While the defender is still behind the goal line, an attacker (Team B) kicks the ball past the goalkeeper (Team A) and the ball is going towards Team A’s goal. The defender re-enters the field without the referee’s permission, clears the ball in their penalty area and prevents it from entering the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick because the defender re-entered the field without the required permission and interfered with play inside their penalty area. Law 12 states that if this offence denies the opposing team a goal, the player is sent off (direct red card).
The goalkeeper saves a penalty kick near the end of the second half but the referee orders a retake because of an offence by the goalkeeper. As the first attempt to score a goal was unsuccessful, the attacking team wants to change the player who will take the retaken kick. Is it allowed?
Yes, provided that the 'new' player taking the penalty kick is clearly identified.
A defender recklessly fouls an attacker and the point of contact with the attacker's leg is on the penalty area line. What is the correct decision?
According to Law 1 – The Field of Play, the lines belong to the areas of which they are boundaries so the foul is considered as having occurred inside the penalty area. The referee awards a penalty kick and cautions the defender (yellow card).
A player takes a throw-in quickly and delivers the ball to a team-mate who is in an offside position. The team-mate controls the ball inside the opponents’ penalty area and is then carelessly fouled by an opponent. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick because there is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from a throw-in.
After a throw-in has been taken, the ball enters the penalty area, bounces off the ground, and a defender deliberately touches it with the arm. The referee notices a handball offence and immediately blows the whistle, even though the ball has gone to an attacker who takes a shot just after the whistle was blown. What is the decision if the ball enters the goal?
The referee should wait a few seconds to allow a possible advantage to develop. However, as play has been stopped by the referee, the ball was out of play when the goal was scored so it cannot be awarded. In this case, play is restarted with a penalty kick for the handball offence and, depending on the exact situation, any appropriate disciplinary action.
An attacker and a defender challenge for the ball inside the penalty area. The attacker is faster and plays the ball first, whereas the defender misses it, carelessly steps on the opponent’s foot and stops a promising attack. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The defender is not cautioned (no yellow card) because the offence which stopped a promising attack occurred inside the defender’s penalty area and was a challenge for the ball.
A defender pushes an attacker who is in the penalty area and in front of the empty goal. The attacker loses balance, falls down and accidentally touches the ball with the hand. Immediately after that, the attacker manages to kick the ball and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick and sends off the defender (red card for a DOGSO offence). The referee cannot apply the advantage and award the goal because the player scored in the opponents’ goal immediately after the ball had touched their hand/arm.
An attacker runs with the ball into the opponents’ penalty area (one-on-one situation). A defender catches up with the attacker but has no possibility to play the ball so the defender pushes the opponent to deny an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO). What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The defender is sent off (red card) for DOGSO because the offence was not an attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball.
A defender pulls an attacker’s shirt to stop a promising attack (SPA). The referee applies the advantage as the attacker gets free of the opponent and runs with the ball into the penalty area. After that, the same defender catches up with the attacker, challenges for the ball in a reckless manner and fouls the attacker (no DOGSO offence). What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick and cautions (yellow card, YC) the defender for the reckless challenge. There is no YC for the SPA offence because, by playing the advantage, the promising attack was continued/restored.
After a penalty kick has been taken, the ball is not reached by the goalkeeper and rebounds into the field of play from the goalpost. A defender tries to kick the ball away but fails to touch it. After that, the attacker (who took the penalty) kicks the ball and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards an indirect free kick to the defending team because the kicker played the ball a second time before it has touched another player.
At a penalty kick, the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line before the ball is kicked. The goalkeeper makes a save but the ball rebounds from the goalkeeper to an attacking team player who scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee plays the advantage for the goalkeeper’s offence and awards the goal. As the penalty kick is not retaken, there is no disciplinary sanction (warning or caution) for the goalkeeper.
At the moment the penalty kick is taken, players of both teams are positioned outside the penalty area/penalty arc and in front of the goal, except one attacking team player who stands next to the penalty area. What is the correct decision if a goal is scored?
As long as the player is inside the field of play, outside the penalty area and behind the penalty mark, the goal is awarded.
At the taking of a penalty kick, the identified kicker touches the ball once (kicks it forward) and then leaves the ball to a team-mate who entered the penalty area after the ball was in play and scores a goal. What is the correct decision?
The goal is awarded. Law 14 does not require that the kicker must take a shot. Passing the ball is allowed provided that the ball is not kicked backwards and the kicker does not touch it a second time (before it has touched another player).
A defender commits a foul challenge within their own penalty area which denies an attacker an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO) and endangers the safety of the opponent. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick and sends off the defender. When two offences occur at the same time, the more serious offence must be punished. Therefore, it is a red card for serious foul play (not a yellow card for the DOGSO offence that was a challenge for the ball inside the penalty area).
Before a penalty kick is taken, the defending goalkeeper moves their arms, jumps up and down, and moves along the goal line, having part of each foot on or above the line until the ball is kicked. What should the referee do in this situation?
The goalkeeper is allowed to move their body and arms provided their actions/gestures are not judged by the referee as being disrespectful and/or unfair.
A player kicks a free kick into the opponents’ penalty area. While the ball is in the air, a defender holds an attacker and prevents them from jumping for the ball. After that, the ball goes to another attacker who scores a goal, having been in an offside position when the ball was last played by a team-mate. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal (because of the offside offence) and awards a penalty kick (as the holding offence occurred before the offside offence). If the foul denied an obvious-goal scoring opportunity (DOGSO), the defender is sent off (red card, no attempt to play the ball or challenge for the ball). If it was not a DOGSO situation, the defender is cautioned (yellow card).
At a penalty kick, the goalkeeper has one foot in front of the goal line and one behind it at the moment the ball is kicked. The goalkeeper saves the kick and prevents the ball from entering the goal. What is the referee’s decision?
The amended Law 14 requires the defending goalkeeper to have at least part of one foot touching, in line with, or behind, the goal line until the moment the ball is kicked. Therefore, the goalkeeper has not committed an offence and the referee allows play to continue.
A player kicks a free kick into the opponents’ penalty area. While the ball is in the air, the defending team goalkeeper jumps and attempts to punch the ball but does not touch it. As a result, the goalkeeper bumps into the attacker and knocks them down. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick and takes appropriate disciplinary action against the goalkeeper:
caution (yellow card) – if the offence was reckless or denied the opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity
sending-off (red card) – if the goalkeeper endangered the safety of the attacker
An attacking player runs with the ball towards the opponents’ goal. A defending player first pushes the attacker (outside the penalty area) and then deliberately trips the opponent and this (second) contact is inside the penalty area. What is the correct decision?
The referee applies advantage for the push and awards a penalty kick for the tripping offence which occurred inside the penalty area. If the tripping offence stopped a promising attack or denied the attacker an obvious goal-scoring opportunity, the defender receives the appropriate disciplinary sanction.
While the ball is in play, in the middle of the field, a defender starts a fight with an attacker and strikes the opposing player in the defender’s penalty area. What is the referee’s decision?
If the first offence was by the defender in their penalty area and the ball was in play, it is a penalty kick – it does not matter where the ball was when the offence occurred as long as it was in play. The defender is sent off (red card) for violent conduct.
At the taking of the penalty kick, before the ball is in play, the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line. The ball misses the goal and goes out for a goal kick. What is the referee’s decision?
Play restarts with a goal kick unless the goalkeeper’s offence clearly impacted on the kicker. In this case, the kick is retaken; the goalkeeper is warned for the first such offence in the game and cautioned (yellow card, YC) for any subsequent offence(s) in the game (including the re-take).
At the taking of the penalty kick, before the ball is in play, the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line. The ball rebounds from the goalpost(s) and does not enter the goal. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee allows play to continue unless the goalkeeper’s offence clearly impacted on the kicker. In this case, the kick is retaken; the goalkeeper is warned for the first such offence in the game and cautioned (yellow card, YC) for any subsequent offence(s) in the game (including the re-take).
At the taking of the penalty kick, before the ball is in play, the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line and then prevents the ball from entering the goal. What is the referee’s decision?
The penalty kick is retaken. The goalkeeper is warned for the first offence in the game and cautioned (yellow card, YC) for any subsequent offence(s) in the game (including the re-take).
Team A takes a corner kick and Team B goalkeeper catches the ball within their penalty area. After that, before releasing the ball, the goalkeeper deliberately touches Team A player’s head with their hand and pushes the opponent. What is the referee’s decision?
The referee stops play and awards a penalty kick to Team A. The goalkeeper is sent off (red card) for violent conduct. Before the penalty kick is taken, Team B must either:
decide which of the remaining players on the field of play will become a new goalkeeper and change their equipment accordingly
substitute one of the remaining players with a substitute goalkeeper (if they have not already used the maximum number of permitted substitutes)
The referee signals for the penalty kick to be taken. A player takes a few steps and walks slowly towards the ball. After completing the ‘run-up’, the player deliberately stops to gain an advantage over a goalkeeper and then kicks the ball into the goal. The player has already been cautioned for another offence during a match. What is the correct decision?
The referee disallows the goal and awards an indirect free kick to the defending team where the player feinted to kick the ball. The player is shown a second yellow card (for unsporting behaviour), then a red card and is sent off.
Additional time is allowed for a penalty kick to be taken at the end of the second half. A player scores a goal directly from the penalty kick. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards the goal provided that the kicker or his/her team-mate(s) has not committed any offence. The match ends once the goal is scored so the final whistle should be blown – there is no kick-off.
A defending team player deliberately handles the ball within their own penalty area to prevent a goal being scored. After that, the ball does not enter the goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a penalty kick. The defending team player is sent off (red card).
A player has completed their run-up and deliberately stops at the end and feints to gain an advantage over a goalkeeper. The penalty kick is scored. What is the referee’s decision?
An indirect free kick is awarded to the defending team. The kicker is cautioned (yellow card, YC) for unsporting behaviour.
Once the referee has signalled for a penalty kick to be taken, a team-mate takes the kick instead of the identified kicker. What is the correct decision?
Play is stopped by the referee and restarted with an indirect free kick to the defending team, regardless of whether or not a goal is scored. The player who took the kick is cautioned (yellow card).
After the penalty kick has been taken the ball rebounds into the field of play from the crossbar/goalpost. Can the kicker play the ball again?
The kicker may only touch the ball again after it has touched another player otherwise it is an indirect free kick to the defending team (or direct free kick for deliberate handball).
While taking a penalty kick, a player completes their run-up and feints to kick the ball but in the end does not touch the ball. What is the referee's decision?
The player is cautioned (yellow card, YC) for unsporting behaviour and the penalty kick is retaken. A free kick cannot be awarded against the offender because the ball was never in play.
After a player has taken a penalty kick the ball rebounds 1) from a goalkeeper 2) from the crossbar or goalposts. What is the correct procedure?
In both cases the ball remains in play and assuming there have been no offences committed:
If the ball rebounds from the goalkeeper, the kicker can play the ball again and score a goal.
If the ball rebounds from the crossbar/goalposts, the kicker must not play the ball again until it has touched another player.
Is it allowed to change the kicker if the penalty kick has to be retaken?
Yes, provided that the 'new' player taking the penalty kick is clearly identified.