Law 4 - The Players' Equipment | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
4
The Players' Equipment
Law
4
The Players' Equipment
Law
4
The Players' Equipment
Law
4
The Players' Equipment
4
.
1
Safety
A player must not use equipment or wear anything that is dangerous.
All items of jewellery (necklaces, rings, bracelets, earrings, leather bands, rubber bands, etc.) are forbidden and must be removed. Using tape to cover jewellery is not permitted.
Accessories are permitted as long as they are not dangerous and are safely and securely covered. Dangerous items must be removed and not taped or covered.
The players must be inspected before the start of the match and substitutes before they enter the field of play. If a player is wearing or using unauthorised/dangerous equipment or
jewellery
accessories
, the referee must order the player to:
remove the item
leave the field of play at the next stoppage if the player is unable or unwilling to comply
A player who refuses to comply or wears the item again must be cautioned.
4
.
2
Compulsory equipment
The compulsory equipment of a player comprises the following separate items:
a shirt with sleeves
shorts
socks – tape or any material applied or worn externally must be the same colour as that part of the sock it is applied to or covers
shinguards – these must be made of a suitable material and be of an appropriate size to provide reasonable protection and be covered by the socks. Players are responsible for the size and suitability of their shinguards
footwear
The team captain must wear the armband issued or authorised by the relevant competition organiser, or a single-coloured armband that may also have the word ‘captain’ or the letter ‘C’ or a translation thereof, which should also be a single colour (see also ‘General modifications’).
A player whose footwear or shinguard is lost accidentally must replace it as soon as possible and no later than when the ball next goes out of play; if before doing so the player plays the ball and/or scores a goal, the goal is awarded.
4
.
3
Colours
The two teams must wear colours that distinguish them from each other and the match officials
Each goalkeeper must wear colours that are distinguishable from the other players and the match officials
If the two goalkeepers’ shirts are the same colour and neither has another shirt, the referee allows the match to be played
Undershirts must be:
a single colour which is the same colour as the main colour of the shirt sleeve
or
a pattern/colours which exactly replicate(s) the shirt sleeve
Undershorts/tights must be the same colour as the main colour of the shorts or the lowest part of the shorts – players of the same team must wear the same colour.
4
.
4
Other equipment
Non-dangerous protective equipment, for example gloves, headgear, facemasks and knee and arm protectors made of soft, lightweight padded material is permitted, as are goalkeepers’ caps and sports spectacles. Goalkeepers may wear tracksuit bottoms.
Head covers
Where head covers (excluding goalkeepers’ caps) are worn, they must:
be black or the same main colour as the shirt (provided that the players of the same team wear the same colour)
be in keeping with the professional appearance of the player’s equipment
not be attached to the shirt
not be dangerous to the player wearing it or any other player (e.g. opening/closing mechanism around neck)
not have any part(s) extending out from the surface (protruding elements)
Electronic communication
Players (including substitutes/substituted and sent-off players) are not permitted to wear or use any form of electronic or communication equipment (except where EPTS is allowed). The use of any form of electronic communication by team officials is permitted where it directly relates to player welfare or safety or for tactical/coaching reasons but only small, mobile, handheld equipment (e.g. microphone, headphone, earpiece, mobile phone/smartphone, smartwatch, tablet, laptop) may be used. A team official who uses unauthorised equipment or who behaves in an inappropriate manner as a result of the use of electronic or communication equipment will be sent off.
Electronic performance and tracking systems (EPTS)
Where wearable technology (WT) as part of electronic performance and tracking systems (EPTS) is used in matches played in an official competition organised under the auspices of FIFA, confederations or national football associations, the competition organiser must ensure that the technology attached to the players' equipment is not dangerous and meets the requirements for wearable EPTS under the FIFA Quality Programme for EPTS .
Where EPTS are provided by the match or competition organiser, it is the responsibility of that match or competition organiser to ensure that the information and data transmitted from EPTS to the technical area during matches played in an official competition are reliable and accurate.
The FIFA Quality Programme for EPTS supports competition organisers with the approval process of reliable and accurate electronic performance and tracking systems.
4
.
5
Slogans, statements, images and advertising
Equipment must not have any political, religious or personal slogans, statements or images. Players must not reveal undergarments that show political, religious, personal slogans, statements or images, or advertising other than the manufacturer’s logo. For any offence the player and/or the team will be sanctioned by the competition organiser, national football association or by FIFA.
Principles
Law 4 applies to all equipment (including clothing) worn by players, substitutes and substituted players; its principles also apply to all team officials in the technical area
The following are (usually) permitted:
the player’s number, name, team crest/logo, initiative slogans/emblems promoting the game of football, respect and integrity as well as any advertising permitted by competition rules or national FA, confederation or FIFA regulations
the facts of a match: teams, date, competition/event, venue
Permitted slogans, statements or images should be confined to the shirt front and/or armband
In some cases, the slogan, statement or image might only appear on the captain’s armband
Interpreting the Law
When interpreting whether a slogan, statement or image is permissible, note should be taken of Law 12 (Fouls and Misconduct), which requires the referee to take action against a player who is guilty of:
using offensive, insulting or abusive language and/or action(s)
acting in a provocative, derisory or inflammatory way
Any slogan, statement or image which falls into any of these categories is not permitted.
Whilst ‘religious’ and ‘personal’ are relatively easily defined, ‘political’ is less clear but slogans, statements or images related to the following are not permitted:
any person(s), living or dead (unless part of the official competition name)
any local, regional, national or international political party/organisation/group, etc.
any local, regional or national government or any of its departments, offices or functions
any organisation which is discriminatory
any organisation whose aims/actions are likely to offend a notable number of people
any specific political act/event
When commemorating a significant national or international event, the sensibilities of the opposing team (including its supporters) and the general public should be carefully considered.
Competition rules may contain further restrictions/limitations, particularly in relation to the size, number and position of permitted slogans, statements and images. It is recommended that disputes relating to slogans, statements or images be resolved prior to a match/competition taking place.
4
.
6
Offences and sanctions
For any offence, play need not be stopped and the player:
is instructed by the referee to leave the field of play to correct the equipment
leaves when play stops, unless the equipment has already been corrected
A player who leaves the field of play to correct or change equipment must:
have the equipment checked by a match official before being allowed to re-enter
only re-enter with the referee’s permission (which may be given during play)
A player who enters without permission must be cautioned, and if play is stopped to issue the caution, an indirect free kick is awarded from the position of the ball when play was stopped, unless there was interference, in which case a direct free kick (or penalty kick) is awarded from the position of the interference.
FAQs
The referee notices that a player is wearing small earrings during a match. What is the correct procedure?
The referee must require the player to leave the field of play and have the earrings removed or safely and securely covered.
During the pre-match inspection, the referee notices that a player is wearing a necklace. What is the correct procedure?
If the referee decides it is dangerous, the player must remove the necklace before they can play. If the referee decides it is not dangerous, it can be worn as long as it is safely and securely covered.
The referee notices that a player is wearing or using unauthorised/dangerous equipment or accessories during a match. What is the correct procedure?
The player must leave the field of play and remove the incorrect/dangerous equipment or accessories (it is not necessary to stop play). Once the equipment/accessories have been removed and the player has been checked by a match official, the player must wait for a signal from the referee before re-entering (which may be given during play).
The referee instructs a player to leave the field of play and replace their footwear. After the equipment has been changed and checked by the fourth official, the player does not wait for a signal from the referee, re-enters the field, and becomes involved in play by touching the ball in the opponents’ half. What is the correct decision?
The referee stops play, awards a direct free kick to the opposing team from the position of the interference, and cautions (yellow card) the player for re-entering the field of play without the referee’s permission.
The referee stops play because the goalkeeper is seriously injured and unable to continue. What is the correct procedure if their team has already used the maximum number of substitutes and/or substitution opportunities?
The team must have a goalkeeper, so one of the remaining players on the field takes over as goalkeeper and changes into a shirt that clearly distinguishes them from the other players and the match officials.
During the match, the referee sees that the goalkeeper is not wearing gloves. What should the referee do?
No action is needed as the Laws of the Game do not require the goalkeeper to wear gloves. Gloves are mentioned as optional (for all players) in Law 4 – The Player’s Equipment.
A match official checks substitutes’ equipment before they enter the field of play. Is the match official responsible for controlling the size and material of their shinguards?
Shinguards are compulsory for all players, so the match official must check that shinguards are being worn and that they are covered by socks. However, it is each player’s responsibility to ensure that the size and material of their shinguards provide reasonable protection.
What is the correct procedure when the team captain is being substituted?
Each team must have a captain on the field of play who can be easily identified by the referee so if the captain is substituted, another player on the field must wear a captain’s armband.
A player accidentally loses a shoe inside the opponents’ penalty area. A team mate plays the ball to the player who scores a goal with the foot that has no shoe. What is the correct decision?
A player whose footwear is lost accidentally must replace it as soon as possible and no later than when the ball next goes out of play. If before doing so the player plays the ball and/or scores a goal, the referee awards the goal.
A player has accidentally lost a shoe during a match. As the ball is in play and the player’s team is attacking, the player remains on the field, gets the ball and makes a pass to a team-mate who scores a goal. What is the referee’s decision?
A player whose footwear is lost accidentally must replace it as soon as possible and no later than when the ball next goes out of play. If before doing so the player plays the ball and/or scores a goal, the goal is awarded.
A player had left the field to correct or change equipment and then returned during play without the referee’s permission. What are the sanction and restart?
A player must be cautioned (yellow card, YC). If play was stopped to issue the YC, it will be restarted with:
a direct free kick (or penalty kick) – from the position of interference, or
an indirect free kick – from the position of the ball when play was stopped (if there was no interference).
A player has accidentally lost footwear and then scores a goal before the ball goes out of play. Is the goal awarded?
Yes. A player whose footwear or shinguard is lost accidentally must replace it as soon as possible and no later than when the ball next goes out of play. If before doing so the player plays the ball and/or scores a goal, the goal is awarded.