Law 10 - The Outcome of a Match | IFAB
You are about to change to another season.
Law
10
Determining the Outcome of a Match
Law
10
Determining the Outcome of a Match
Law
10
Determining the Outcome of a Match
Law
10
Determining the Outcome of a Match
10
.
1
Goal scored
A goal is scored when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, between the goalposts and under the crossbar, provided that no offence has been committed by the team scoring the goal.
If the goalkeeper throws the ball directly into the opponents’ goal, a goal kick is awarded.
If a referee signals a goal before the ball has passed wholly over the goal line, play is restarted with a dropped ball.
10
.
2
Winning team
The team scoring the greater number of goals is the winner. If both teams score no goals or an equal number of goals, the match is drawn.
When competition rules require a winning team after a drawn match or home-and-away tie, the only permitted procedures to determine the winning team are:
away goals rule
two equal periods of extra time not exceeding 15 minutes each
penalties (penalty shoot-out)
A combination of the above procedures may be used.
10
.
3
Penalties (penalty shoot-out)
Penalties (penalty shoot-out) are taken after the match has ended and unless otherwise stated, the relevant Laws of the Game apply. A player who has been sent off during the match is not permitted to take part; warnings and cautions issued to players and team officials during the match are not carried forward into penalties (penalty shoot-out).
Procedure
Before penalties (penalty shoot-out)
start
Unless there are other considerations (e.g. ground conditions, safety etc.), the referee tosses a coin to decide the goal at which the kicks will be taken, which may only be changed for safety reasons or if the goal or playing surface becomes unusable
The referee tosses a coin again, and the team that wins the toss decides whether to take the first or second kick
With the exception of a substitute for a goalkeeper who is unable to continue, only players who are on the field of play or are temporarily off the field of play (injury, adjusting equipment etc.) at the end of the match are eligible to take kicks
Each team is responsible for selecting from the eligible players the order in which they will take the kicks. The referee is not informed of the order
If at the end of the match and before or during the kicks one team has a greater number of players than its opponents, it must reduce its numbers to the same number as its opponents and the referee must be informed of the name and number of each player excluded. Any excluded player is not eligible to take part in the kicks (except as outlined below)
A goalkeeper who is unable to continue before or during the kicks may be replaced by a player excluded to equalise the number of players or, if their team has not used its maximum permitted number of substitutes, a named substitute, but the replaced goalkeeper takes no further part and may not take a kick
If the goalkeeper has already taken a kick, the replacement may not take a kick until the next round of kicks
During penalties (penalty shoot-out)
Only eligible players and match officials are permitted to remain on the field of play
All eligible players, except the player taking the kick and the two goalkeepers, must remain within the centre circle
The goalkeeper of the kicker must remain on the field of play, outside the penalty area, on the goal line where it meets the penalty area boundary line
An eligible player may change places with the goalkeeper
The kick is completed when the ball stops moving, goes out of play or the referee stops play for any offence; the kicker may not
deliberately
play the ball a second time
If the kicker accidentally kicks the ball with both feet simultaneously or the ball touches their non-kicking foot or leg immediately after the kick:
if the ball enters the goal from the kick, the kick is retaken
if the ball does not enter the goal from the kick, the kick is recorded as missed
The referee keeps a record of the kicks
If the goalkeeper commits an offence and, as a result, the kick is retaken, the goalkeeper is warned for the first offence and cautioned for any subsequent offence(s)
If the kicker is penalised for an offence committed after the referee has signalled for the kick to be taken, that kick is recorded as missed and the kicker is cautioned
If both the goalkeeper and the kicker commit an offence at the same time, the kick is recorded as missed and the kicker is cautioned.
Subject to the conditions explained below, both teams take five kicks
The kicks are taken alternately by the teams
Each kick is taken by a different player, and all eligible players must take a kick before any player can take a second kick
If, before both teams have taken five kicks, one has scored more goals than the other could score, even if it were to complete its five kicks, no more kicks are taken
If, after both teams have taken five kicks, the scores are level, kicks continue until one team has scored a goal more than the other from the same number of kicks
The above principle continues for any subsequent sequence of kicks but a team may change the order of kickers
Penalties (penalty shoot-out) must not be delayed for a player who leaves the field of play. The player’s kick will be forfeited (not scored) if the player does not return in time to take a kick
Substitutions and sendings-off during penalties (penalty shoot-out)
A player, substitute, substituted player or team official may be cautioned or sent off
A goalkeeper who is sent off must be replaced by an eligible player
A player other than the goalkeeper who is unable to continue may not be replaced
The referee must not abandon the match if a team is reduced to fewer than seven players
FAQs
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), a player slips while taking a kick. The ball accidentally touches the player’s non-kicking foot/leg at the same time or immediately after the kick and does not enter the goal. What is the correct decision if the goalkeeper has not committed any offence?
The kick is recorded as missed.
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), a player slips while taking a kick. The ball accidentally touches the player’s non-kicking foot/leg at the same time or immediately after the kick and then enters the goal from the kick. What is the correct decision?
The kick cannot be scored as there was a double touch by the kicker. However, as the second touch was accidental, the kick is retaken (it is not recorded as missed).
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), after completing the run-up, the kicker feints to kick the ball and, at the same time, the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line. What is the referee’s decision?
The kick is recorded as missed and the kicker is cautioned (yellow card, YC).
The referee blows the whistle at the end of the second half of extra time after the ball has gone out of play for a throw-in near Team A’s penalty area. A Team B player angrily approaches the referee and shows clear dissent, complaining that the referee did not allow the throw-in to be taken. What is the decision if the same player has already been shown a yellow card (YC) and the match will be decided by penalties (penalty shoot-out)?
Law 10 states that penalties are taken after the match has ended (they are not part of the match and therefore begin after the final whistle). Yellow cards are not carried forward into the penalty shoot-out, so a player who received a YC during normal or extra time and then receives a YC for dissent after the final whistle is not sent off. It is considered their first YC in the penalty shoot-out, and the player may take part in the penalties.
The match ends in a draw and requires penalties (penalty shoot-out) to determine the winning team. What is the correct procedure for the toss of a coin?
The referee tosses a coin twice.
The first toss decides the goal at which the kicks will be taken. There is no “captain’s choice” – the referee will usually assign one side of the coin to one goal and the other side of the coin to the other goal.
The team winning the second toss chooses whether to take the first or second kick.
Considering the safety of players, the ground conditions or other reasons, the referee may:
decide the goal without tossing a coin.
change the goal during the penalties, for example, if the goal or playing surface becomes unusable.
During the second half of extra time, a match official is informed that Team A wants to use a substitute, however, there is no stoppage in play before the referee signals the end of extra time. Can Team A make the substitution before penalties (penalty shoot-out) start as they made the request before the final whistle?
Except for a substitute for a goalkeeper who is unable to continue, only players who are on the field of play or temporarily off the field at the end of the match are eligible to take part in the penalties. Therefore, as the substitution did not take place before the end of extra time, it cannot be made even though it was requested before the final whistle.
A team official is cautioned (yellow card, YC) during extra time and then receives a YC during penalties (penalty shoot-out). What is the correct procedure?
Warnings and cautions (YCs) issued during the match (including during extra time) are not carried forward into penalties (penalty shoot-out). A team official who receives a YC during the match and then during the penalties (penalty shoot-out) is not sent off. The two separate cautions are reported to the appropriate authorities.
A goalkeeper is cautioned (yellow card) during the match which is then followed by penalties (penalty shoot-out). The goalkeeper saves the first kick and makes a provocative gesture towards spectators of the opposing team. What is the correct decision?
The goalkeeper is shown a yellow card but is not sent off because Law 10 states that cautions (and warnings) issued to players and team officials during the match are not carried forward into penalties (penalty shoot-out). Both cautions are reported to the appropriate authorities.
An attacking team player takes a shot on the goal. The goalkeeper dives for the ball and catches it inside their goal area. After that, the goalkeeper gets up and accidentally throws the ball into their team’s own goal. What is the correct decision?
The referee awards a goal.
Team A has not used the maximum number of substitutes and substitution opportunities during the match. After the end of extra time, the coach of Team A wants to replace one player with a substitute before penalties (penalty shoot-out) start. Is this allowed?
No. With the exception of a substitute for a goalkeeper who is unable to continue, only players who are on the field of play or are temporarily off the field of play (injury, adjusting equipment etc.) at the end of the match are eligible to take kicks.
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), all eligible players of both teams have taken a kick once. After the eleven kicks, the scores are level. Who will take the first kick in the second round?
The first kick will be taken by the team that took the first kick of the first round. Both teams may change the order of their kickers – the referee is not informed of the order.
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), a Team A player uses an offensive gesture towards the opposing goalkeeper after taking their kick. What is the correct decision?
The outcome of the kick is recorded (it cannot be declared missed as the kick had been taken before the offence), the player is sent off (red card) and Team B must remove one player and inform the referee of the name and number of this player.
At the end of a drawn match, Team A has one unused substitute but has used all its substitution opportunities. penalties (penalty shoot-out) start, during which the goalkeeper of Team A is injured and unable to continue. Can the goalkeeper be replaced by a substitute?
Yes, because the Laws allow a goalkeeper who is unable to continue to be replaced by an unused substitute. In addition, as penalties (penalty shoot-out) are not part of the match, any restrictions on substitution opportunities do not apply.
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), the goalkeeper has both feet in front of the goal line and, as a result, the kick is retaken. What disciplinary action does the referee take?
As most goalkeeper encroachment results from mis-anticipating when the ball will be kicked, the goalkeeper is warned for a first offence but must be cautioned (yellow card, YC) for any further offence(s) at the retaken kick and/or any subsequent kick.
Penalties (penalty shoot-out) are taken after the end of extra time. A player has completed their run-up, deliberately stops to gain an advantage over a goalkeeper and then kicks the ball into the goal. The same player was cautioned (yellow card) for another offence during extra time. What is the referee’s decision?
The kick is recorded as missed and the kicker is cautioned for unsporting behaviour (illegal feinting). Cautions issued during the match (including during extra time) are not carried forward into penalties (penalty shoot-out) so the player who received a yellow card during both the match and the penalties (penalty shoot-out) is not sent off. The two separate cautions are reported to the appropriate authorities.
A goalkeeper is injured during penalties (penalty shoot-out). Their team has already used its maximum number of substitutes and the goalkeeper cannot be replaced. May the goalkeeper change places with a team-mate who is on the field of play and eligible to take part in the kicks?
Yes, this is permitted.
A goalkeeper is injured during penalties (penalty shoot-out) and is replaced by a substitute (another goalkeeper). What is the further procedure?
The replaced goalkeeper takes no further part and may not take a kick. If the goalkeeper has already taken a kick, the replacement may not take a kick until the next round of kicks.
A player (other than the goalkeeper) is injured during penalties (penalty shoot-out) and unable to continue. Their team has not used its maximum number of substitutes. What is the correct procedure?
The player can leave the penalties (penalty shoot-out) but may not be replaced. The opposing team must remove one player (to equalise the numbers) and inform the referee.
A player (Team A) is injured at the end of extra time and unable to continue. Team A has already used its maximum number of substitutes. May Team A exclude the injured player from taking part in the penalties (penalty shoot-out)? What is the correct procedure assuming that both teams have the same number of players on the field?
Yes, the injured player may be excluded. Team B must then exclude one player and inform the referee of the name/number of this excluded player.
A player is cautioned (yellow card, YC) during extra time. After the match has ended, the same player receives a YC during penalties (penalty shoot-out). What is the referee’s decision?
Warnings and cautions (YCs) issued during the match (including during extra time) are not carried forward into penalties (penalty shoot-out). A player who receives a YC during both the match and the penalties (penalty shoot-out) is not sent off. The two separate cautions are reported to the appropriate authorities.
A player is shown a direct red card during penalties (penalty shoot-out). What is the correct procedure?
The player is sent off and the opposing team must withdraw one player as well. The referee must be informed which player is being withdrawn.
A goalkeeper is injured during penalties (penalty shoot-out) and is unable to continue. The team has already used three substitutes. May the injured goalkeeper be replaced?
Yes, the goalkeeper may be replaced by:
a substitute if the competition rules allow an additional substitute in extra time
a player excluded to equalise the number of players
a team-mate who is on the field.
Can an injured player who is off the field of play being treated at the final whistle take part in penalties (penalty shoot-out)?
Yes – any player who was temporarily off the field for a valid reason (injury, changing equipment etc.) is eligible to take a kick. However, substitutions cannot be made after the match has ended except for a goalkeeper who is unable to continue (if the team has not used the maximum number of substitutes).
Must the referee be informed of the order in which players will take the kicks during penalties (penalty shoot-out)?
No. The order of the kickers is the tactical responsibility of the teams. The referee’s responsibility is to make sure that no player takes a second kick before every other team member has taken their first kick.
Is it allowed to replace a goalkeeper after the match has ended, before penalties (penalty shoot-out)?
It is only allowed if a goalkeeper is unable to continue e.g. injured, ill and the team has not used the maximum number of substitutes.
At the end of the match and before penalties (penalty shoot-out) Team A has a greater number of players than its opponents (Team B). What is the correct procedure?
Team A must reduce its numbers to the same number as its opponents and the referee must be informed of the name and number of each player excluded. Any such excluded player is not eligible to take part in the kicks (except as outlined in the Laws of the Game).
A coach enters the field of play during penalties (penalty shoot-out) and approaches the penalty area to confront the referee. What action does the referee take?
The coach is sent off (red card) and must leave the field of play and its immediate surrounds, including the technical area.
During penalties (penalty shoot-out), a coach acts in a provocative manner towards opposing team officials. What is the correct decision?
The referee may take disciplinary action against team officials who fail to act in a responsible manner during kicks. The coach will be cautioned (yellow card) or sent off (red card) depending on the exact circumstances.